Projects\ldots A gallery of miniature craftsmanship

This section is devoted to showing you some of

Modelmakers made tiny ships in bottles and detailed
the great projects made on tabletop machine
display models of ships. In fact, before naval
tools like those discussed in this book. After all, it
architects began drawing plans of ships and
isn't really the tools yOll are interested in so much
shipwrights knew how to read them, ship designers
as what can be made with them. A column of figures
built models and the builders used that as a guide.
about the size and accuracy of a machine will tell
Despite the quality, accuracy and detail of these old
you how big it is and how well
projects, the tools they had to
it is built, but it still won't tell
work with were crude by today' s
you what can be built with it.
standards. As tools and materials
These photos are some of the
have improved, it has become
most important in the book
easier and more fun to make
because they show what these
very precise parts. Almost all of
tools in the hands of craftsmen
the projects shown here were
have actually done. And yet, as
made by hobbyists, not
impressive as some of these
professional machinists. If you
projects are , they still on ly An American quarter and dime are have patience, some skill with
represent the best of what has usedfor size reference in many photos your hands and a desire to make
been done to date, not the best in this book. For those outside the projects like these, today's tools
that will ever be done. That is United States who might not be wi ll bring you a lot of
up to you.
familiar with these coins, they are satisfaction and enjoyment.
Hundreds of years ago, shown here at actual size. A quarter There is not a project here that
craftsmen made timepieces and ($.25) is .950" or 24.1mm in diameter, couldn't have been built on a
mechanical calendars that while a dime ($.10) is. 705"or 17.9mm tabletop in your own kitchen,
den or home shop.
required tremendous precision. in diameter.

Steam trador, Dennis Franz, Newton, Kansas

Stover Uhit 'n miss" gas engine
George Luhrs, Shoreham, New York

A lot of detail is packed into a very tiny package.
This model won 2nd prize at the 1995 Sherline
Machinist's Challenge contest in Michigan.

Paint and pinstripes add a nice finish to this model
which finished 4th in 1995. It has a 7/16" bore and
5/8" stroke. The speed control is quite detailed and
complicated.
10

1/12 Ferrori V·12 Fl Engine
Bob Breslauer

Ft. Lauderdale, Florida
Approx im ately 1500 hand made
pieces went into thi s d isplay model
engine and trans mi ss ion. More
photos of it can be see n in the
profile on Bob on page 3 11 at the
beg inning of Sect ion 5.

Single odion steam engine
Chris Thompson
Colorado Springs, Colorado
AI the extreme small end
of the size scale is thi s
lin y steam engine wit h a
1/8" (3.2 mm) bore and
stroke.

GaHling gun, George Britnell, Strongsville, Ohio
This walnu t and brass gun took 3rd place in the 1995
Sherline Machini st's Challenge contest. The barre ls
rotate and the elevation mechani sm also works. The
quality of fini sh on every part is superb.

Miniature micrometer, Dennis Scherf, Cedarburg, Wisconsin
Miniature tool s are a popular subject for modelers.
Thi s tool and felt-lined box can easily be carried in a
jXlCket and is a great "conversation starter."

"

Air Compressor, steam engine and miniature tools
Kurt Schulz, Harper Woods, Michigan

Not just a steam engine, but the air compressor to
drive it too, this handsome model is an interesting
combination of round and hard edged parts, satin
and shiny surfaces. At the bottom are some other of
Kurt's projects: a miniature height gage and two
small mill vises sitting on a ground surface plate.
The small vise would make an interesting tie tack!

Hot air engine, Scotty HewiH, Van Nuys, California
This delicate engine is powered by the difference in
temperature above and below it. Set it on a hot cup
of coffee, give it a tum and it wi ll spin like crazy for
over 15 minutes. Scotty produced a short run of these
to sell in toy stores.

.010 Diesel model aircraft engine
Lunkenheimer oiler, Jerry Kieffer, DeForest, Wisconsin

Just like the fu ll size prototype, this tiny oiler delivers measured
amounts of oil to a bearing or cylinder. The "sight hole" through the
base allows the engineer to check the drip rate visually.
12

A simple design and nicely
made aluminum parts make for
an interesting little engine. Not
much in material cost here!

1/30 Corliss steam engine
Jerry Kieffer, DeForest, Wisconsin
(Be low) This model represents Jerry Ki e ffer 's
detennination to build to scale down to the smallest
detail. Even 1/4-20 bolts are scaled to 1130 size.
Though modelers wi ll often use hidden springs to
return th e valve gear, the "pots" at the bottom
actually pull a vac uum just like the real ones. A
portion of a quarter can be seen at the bottom for
scale. (More on Jerry and this engine can be fOlmd
on page 11 2.)

Above is a photo of the rea l
1909 Viltcr Corl iss e ngi ne
Jerry used as a prototype for
his mode l. It can be seen in a
stea m engi ne disp lay in
Sussex. Wisconsin. It is said to
produce about 200 horsepower
at 90 RPM. had a 15" bore and
36" s troke and a lo-root
diameter flywheel. The Viller
company still exists in
Milwaukee and now make s
refrigeration equipment.

The photoengraved name plate
is typical of Jerry ' s devotion to
detai l. Notice the hollow air
li ne going into the large brass
elbow. It has a functional
compression fitting and is
made from a hypoder mic
sy ringe needle.

This masterfully built model runs flawlessly on ai r
supplied from a tiny aquarium air pump. Though
others told Jerry he would not be ab le to ach ieve
good performance in a model this small ifhe insisted
on scaling every part, he proved them wrong.

13

U.S.S. Roosevelt
Richard DeVynck
U.s. Virgin Islands
This model is now on display at the Bowdoin
College Museum in Maine. To the left is a detail of
the ship 's boiler. Below can be seen the stack and
some of the deck details. The model is left unplanked
so that all the interior details can be seen .

•• 0'0, 1111( .....

,Iet.

I-Cylinder 4-,ytle ovemead valve model airplane engine
Ron Colonna, McKeesport, Pennsylvania
(Above) Ron built this engine from a design by Eric
Whittle of England. The highly polished pieces and
wood base make it a good display as well as a nice
piece of engineering.

3.Cylinder engine, Jesse Brumberger, Macedon, NY
(Above ieft) This radi al model airplane engine was
an entry in the i996Sherline Machinist's Challenge.

Assorted small projects, Robert Culpepper
(Left) A sma11shop can tum out plenty of nice work.
1
4

Robot Hand, Carl Hammons, Escondido, California

Joe's partner Carl was interested in robotics and
motion controL He built this 4" hand to test a concept
he had in mind for gripping.

Fantasy Gun, John Winters, SeaHle, Washington

Lost wax castings and machined parts are combined
in thi s air powered, B-B firing gun that looks as if it
came straight from a Buck Rogers episode.
Custom silver key ring, Jim Grabner, Leucadia, California

The spiral and rad ial geometric pattern on this sil ver key ring helped it
win a blue ribbon at the San Diego County Fair in Del Mar. Projects like
these are not what comes to mind when most people think about "machine
tools", but in the hands of a creative person, a good tool makes many
things possible. Jim used a rotary table on the mill to create the patterns.
15

Hula-hula radial engine, Russell Kuh, (linton, Wisconsin
(Left) Thi s engi ne gets its name from the interesting
action of the six oscillati ng rad ial cy li nders.

1/6 Ponche piston and cylinder
Pete Weiss, Escondido, California
(Above) As part of a project to build a
runnin g 1/6 sca le Porsc he fl at 6cylinder engi ne, Pete has so far built a
number of the components. See page
120 for more photos.

_19l ... -....

Gap frame stamping press
Glenn Busch, St. (lair Shores, Michigan

1
..

Here are two views of a so lidly built and nicely
finished model. The contrast of brass and
al uminum parts give it a very rich look.

Gyroscope
Tim Schroeder, St. Joseph, Michigan
(Right) This nice ly finished gyroscope includes
detai ls like li ghtening holes in the support arms and
chamfered holes and edges on the wheel. Tim is a
profess ional photographer, so even the photos of his
wo rk are done with great attention to detail.
16

Marine engine and drill press/Waler pump
Scotty HewiH, Van Nuys, California
Scotty's main project won 1st place in the 1995
Sherline Machinist's Challenge, but he also took
5th place with this one. To the right is another of
Scotty's proj ects; an air powered water pump.
Scotty's work always combines many material s,
sk ill s and a lot of imagination. Notice how the
wood bases add a finishing touch li ke a good
frame on a ni ce painting. For more photos and a
profile on Scotty see page 24.

....""'

...

,."

Radar study madel
Frank libuse, Carlsbad, California
This waterline model was used to test radar targct ing
systems for antiship mi ssi les. A number of small
deck fi ttings had to bc fabr ica tcd from me ta l.
Si mpler models were also made to see how much
detail was needed for a mi ss il e to be ab le to
recognize and target a parti cular ship.
Frank is a pilot and industrial dcsigner who started
hi s own design firm and industri al model shop after
retiring from the Air Forcc. He is also Craig' s fath er,
and Craig worked with Frank for severa l years in
the design and model business before starting hi s
own design firm.
17

Miniature Stuart lOY steam engine
Chris Dinardo
Springfield, Illinois
The large hex bolt used as a display base really points out
how small this engine is. Despite its sma ll size. all the
working detai ls are still there. modeled in bronze, brass
and steel.

..."" ... '.,.

2-Cylinder marine engine
Raymond Hasbrouck, New Platz, New York
(Below) This model exhibits a nice combination of materials
and finishes. Notice the engine-turned p.attern on the base. The
custom propeller is an interesting project all its own. (To learn
how to make one, see page 56.)
Thimble steam engine
Richard Long
Wichita, Kansas
(Above) T his tiny butane
powered eng ine drives a
stamping mill. Using the
thimble as part of the design
is a clever way to emphasize
small size.

18

Model airplane display engines
Edwin Teachworth, San Diego, California

Th is is another display model from the same exhibit
and is a model of a Stringfellow steam model
airplane engine. It is made from a comb ination of
materials including styrene, wood and brass. The
original engine won a prize for engine design in 1868
and developed about I horsepower. Display models
need only look li ke the prototype, whil e function is
less important than looks, cost and ease ofbui ldi ng.

This display model ofa 1911 compressed air engine
was built for an exhibition on the history of model
aviation at the San Diego Aerospace Museum.
Though it looks like metal, it is made from cut and
machined styrene components and painted to look
like metal. Styrene is easy to work with, glues
together quickly and is popular for modeling.

Stop motion animation dog, Tom Brierton, Illinois
With all the joint movements of a real dog, this
framework is covered in clay and then photographed
one frame at a time as it is moved in progressive
steps.
Pre-lubricator for steam or air engine
Salvatore Rubino, Naperville, Illinois
This device provides oil under pressure to lubricate
bearings before an engine is started. This extends
engine life substantially since most wear occurs
when bearings are dry.
19

Scroll saw and die filer conversion
Milo Bresley, Bloomington,
Minnesota

Mr. Bresley designed and built
a die fi ler and scro ll saw
powered by hi s Sherline lathe.
The die filer is driven by the
"Scotch yoke" principle. Many
people find the chief source of
enjoyment in their hobby is
designing and making new
accessories fo r their machines.
It not only provides a fu n and
challenging project, but your
machine shop is that much more
complete when you are done.

Quick-change tool holders
Roland F Gaucher, Spencer MassachuseHs
.

This working model of an Aloris toolholder is built
3110 the size of the #1 size ho lder used fo r full size
machines. These holders fo ll ow big machine
practice, allowing tools to be quickly locked onto a
special dovetailed holder. Thi s is another good
example of using the tools in your shop to build
accessories to make your shop that much better
equipped.

20

I

Custom model boats and engines
Don Martin, Sacramento, California
Don 's small shop turn s out so me exce llen t
RIC drag boats. All his tool s arc within easy
reach and a vacuum cleaner rests under the

(Above left) Hi gh perfonnan ce machin ed
out-drive compo nen ts and ex hau st tips
sparkle on Plum Nasly 's transom.
(Left) A Connolley V-8 with supercharger
sits on it s test st and . The ri g pro vid es
readings on temperature and RPM.

Model hot rod, Augie Hiscono, Miami, Florida
This 1125 scale hot rod won the top national award
fo r model cars. Shown here is just the engine and
frame. Notice the scale Jaguar independent rear
suspension made up of almost 100 separate pans.

Shown above is the front part of the hot rod
engine being machined from an aluminum
block. Behind it is the photo of the actual
Ford 427 engine Augie used for reference
in detailing hi s model. More on Augie and
his award wi nning models can be found in a
profile on page 180.

21

Double Corliss steam engine
Wilhelm Huxhold
West Hill, Ontario, Canada
This beautiful and ambitious
project demonstrates why retired
machinist Wilh elm Huxhold's
work is considered among the
best being produced. The closer
you look at every part, the better
they look. Although Mr.
Huxhold's shop is equipped with
many full-size machines, his
favorite projects are very small
in size and are well within the
capabilities of the tabletop
machine tools discussed in this
book. Now that he is retired, he
still puts in a full day's work, but
he gets to choose the projects.

Triple expansion steam engine (left) and machinist's vise (above)
This highly detailed steam engine won the 1997 Sherline
Machinist's Challenge contest. The vise is only a few inches long
and duplicates every detail of the original right down to the
engraved angle scale. The handle is removable.

Na.al ,annan display (left) and steam engine (below)
Timmy Perreira, Haiku, Maui, Hawaii
This 17th Century 24-pound naval cannon is set in
its own diorama. The ship's deck setting adds a sense
of purpose to the brass and oak cannon. Below is a
Rudy Kouhoupt-designed steam engine Mr. Perreira
built from brass, aluminum and cold rolled steel.

22

SECTION I-GENERAl MACHINING
Craftsman Profile-Scotty Hewitt .................... 24
1. Getting information on machining. . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . 27

2. Do you need a lathe, a mill or both? ..... ....... .. ... 29

3. Materials for metalworking ............. .. .. ...... 39
4. Processes for metalworking

4. I-Heat treating . . ... ... . . . . . •.. . . . . . . ..... 45
4.2- Metal finishes ............. . . .. .. .. .... 46
4.3-Castings .............................. 49
4.4-0ther ways to form metal ................ 51
4.5- Joining metal (Solderin g and weld in g) ...... 52
5. Using hand tools and abrasives . . .. . .. . ............ 57

6. Cutting tool s for metalworking
6. I-General notes on cu tting tool s ............. 63
6.2-Cuttin g too ls for both the lathe and mill ..... 65
6.3-Lathe cutting tool s ...................... 72
6.4-C utters for milling .......... .• .......... 81
7. Measuring and measurement tool s .................. 85
8. Coolants and cutting oils .. . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . .. 99
9. General machining terms ..... .. ...... ... ..... .... 10 1
10. Machine tool lubrication and maintenance .... ... .. 107

_..

.°0

9,;'

One of Scotty Hewill :f f ilii
proj e c ts- a 1930 's air
IJOwered race car. For more
on Scott)'. see tile next p(lge.

Craftsman Profile by Craig libuse

scorn HEWln...as much an artist as an artisan
cotty Hewitt of Van Nuys. California is a
relative newcomer to miniature machining.
Scotty spent his life as a race car driver. but
miniature tools always held a fascination for him.
After seeing a Sherline display at a hobby show he
decided to take up the hobby. Joe traded him a
Sherline mill in exchange for some lessons in
driving a race car. Since then his skills as a machinist
have improved much fasterthan Joe ' s have as a race
car driver, but a chance meeting took each of their
lives in a new and fun direction.

S

ScoUy's work is the perfect example of a craftsman
developing an artistic style of his own. The toy-like
quality of his models combines finely machined
metal parts with brightly colored, hand carved
wooden bodywork on his race cars. His marine
engines are also nicely displayed on wooden bases
or in models of skiffs and tugboats. The appeal of
his work has been put to the test in Sherline's
Machinist's Challenge contest at the North
American Model Engineering Society's show in
Wyandotte, Michigan. As judged by the show's
spectators, Scotty's work won first place for three
years to a row.
The projects Scotty produces are not copies of other
people's work nor are they built from standard kits
or plans. They are uniquely his own. Scotty builds
not just with his hands or with his brain but with his
heart as well. He is a machinist, but more, he is also
an artist.

This bright red racer won 1st place in the 1996
Machinist 's Challenge. Probably not the best
machined or most complicated enlry in Ihe contest
that year, it did have a special appeallhal spanned
Ihe range of spectators who do Ihe voling on the
contest entries. Just about everybody who voled gave
one oftheir five votes [0 this car.
Building things that are fun to dijplay is part ofthe
joy of tabletop machining. You don 'I have to be a
machinist to appreciate a project like this. When
friends or grandkids see il on your display shelf,
you gel the added satisfaction of being able to say,
"I made it myself "
24

(Left) One of Scotty 's first winning
projects was this marine engine which
wonfirst place at the N.A.M. E.S coni est
in 1994. Itfeatures a throllle, lubricator,
drain valve and forward and reverse
mechanism which are all fully
fimci ional.

(Above) In 1995, Scolly made Ihe engine
in a much smaller size. displayed it in a
model of a wooden skiff and took first
place again.

.

Projt:ct: 5" Stt:am tu1!hoat
.

Project: 5" CO, powered vintage racer

This little tugboat is another good
example ofeffective display andfealures
a fully functional marine engine and
boiler made from brass. II finished 3rd
place in the 1996 N.A.ME.S contest.
Under the hand carved woodell body is a complete frame and
CO , engine that drives the rear wheels. The hand carved driver
also adds a lot of character to the project and shows allot her
facet of Scolly'S skills as a mode/maker. The detailed display
backgrollnd makes the car seem milch more real. Except for the
quarter in the foreground, the pholo looks almost as if it could
have been taken at a race track in the 1930 ·s.
25

Scaled-down
machine tools and
complete miniature
shops are always
popular subjects Jar
machinists. Notice
the details like
charts and clocks 011
the wall.

These two excellent shops were seen at the North American Model
Engineering Society (N.A.M.E.S.) Exposition in Wyandotte, Michigan.
Both date Jrom the days when machines were driven by a system oj
overhead pulleys and belts.

Mike Foti is a
young man in his
20 's hailing Jrom
/ /iJ/sboro, Oregon.
He designed and
built this American
LaFrance hot rod
fire truck,Jorming
the bodywork by
handJrom brass and soldering the pieces together.
All the small parts are machined. It was built to
compete in the hot rod division oj the national
modeling contest in Salt Lake City Jor 1999. Mike
is among the new generation inspired by the work
oj master modeler Augie Hiscano. (See profile on
page 180.) Although he didn't beot Augie, he got
some good tips Jrom "the Master" and will be back
with even hotter projects in the Juture.

Robert Shipley ofKnoxville, Tennessee deSigned and
built this case to display an old clock from the
dashboard of a /920's automobile. The case is
detailed identically on the back where the works of
the clock can be seen behind the glass cover. In
addition to providing protection, this case turns a
simple clock into an impressive display.
26

lEGION l-Generol Machining

Chapter l-GeHing information on machining
The book every machinist needs
People new to machining are bound to have many
questions. How fast should I turn my cutter for a
particular material ? How do I figure out the pitch of
a gear? What are the tolerances for a "sliding fit" or
a "press fit?" The most traditional sources for thi s
lype of information are books that can be found in
your local library or bookstore. On-line sources like
www.amazon.com and www.barnesandnobel.com
make shopping for books even easier.
The single source I have always turned to first is
Ma chinery's Handbook , which is publi shed by
Industrial Press. This book has been published si nce
1914 and is updated every few years. The small but
thick book has over 2500 pages of information. A
larger "easy- read" version is also available.
I used to recommend this book without reservation
and always suggested that a purchaser get the most
recent version available. After picking up a copy of
the latest edition, however, I am inclined to change
my opinion on the subject. I have noticed that the
direction Industrial Press has chosen to go with the
book is to direct it more to the engineer than the
machini st. Information about machining has been
de leted to make room for information about the
strength of gear teeth and other details that will never
be of concern to the average machinist. In li ght of
this development, I now recommend that rather than
coughing up $80.00 for the latest edition, you can
get all the valuable information you need about
machining and save money too by buying a used
earlier edition from a used book store or over the
Inte rnet. Auction sites like eBay.com often have
issues for sale. The most valuable information on
metals, formula s and processes hasn' t changed
significantly for the past few years, and the 20th will
probably provide all you need for a lifetime of
machining. Use the money you save to bu y an
accessory or another book.

Machinery's Handbook should be cOl/sidered the
basic reference sO/tree for me/alworking question.s.

The Intemet gives instant alCess
to a world of information

connection to the Internet gives you access to search
engines that can find information about any subject
almost in stantly. Newsgroups can also put you in
touch with others who share your interests and allow
you to ask and answer questions about your hobbies.
You also have instant access to product information
about tools, accessories, raw material s and other
resources for your hobby or business. More
importantly, you will be missing out on a lot of fun .
as, in addition to pure information , the Internet also
gives you access to personal sit es that feature
projects made by many tal ented indi vidual s. You
may even find that you want to have a web si te of
your own where you can display your machinin g
accomplishments to the world.
With a com puter, a scanner or digital camera and an
Internet con nection , you are plugged into a new
world of infonnation. Internet access can cost as little
as $20 a month or less for a regular phone lin e
connect ion to $50 or more a month for hi gher speed
connections. It just depends on how fa st you want
the pictures and information to load on your screen.
They say "time is money," and in thi s case, less time
IS more money.

If you are one of those who is resisting getting
hooked up to the Internet, you are putting yourself
at a great disadvantage in today's world. With
computers as cheap as they are now , there is no
excuse for mi ssing out on thi s great resource. A

It amazes me that I can type in a few words on a
search engine and have it search the entire worldwide
web for those words in a few seconds. For exampl e.
I just did a search for the word "lathe" on my favorite

Search Engines do the work for you

search engine, www.google.com. It took just .15
seconds to return a list of 183,000 sites using the
word lathe. Of course, if I were looking for more
specific infonnation, I would have refined my search
with other words like a brand name or model
number, but the fact that a free resource can search
so much infonnation so quickly is simply incredible.
Keep in mind that, unlike an encyclopoedia, anyone
can post infonnation to the Internet, so the responses
turned up by your search have to be judged by you
as to their authenticity and reliability.

Newsgroups and chat groups
There are special interest groups on virtually any
subject you can think of where people of like interest
can ask and answer questions bye-maiL Machinists
have many groups they can join that can be about
machining spec ific projects like steam engines or
about using specific machines like Sherline tools.
For example, the Sherline group can be found by
going to http://www.yahoogroups.com and doing
a search for the word "Sherline". As of June, 2001
the group had 579 members.
Newsgroups generally offer a list of "threads" of
conversation that yo u can read. If you feel like
responding, you can send your message to the group
via e-maiL Your message will be posted and others
can respond to it. Chat groups are more personal
and are more like talking to other people through
your keyboard. You type a response and the answers
pop up on the screen as fast as others who are online at the time can type them in.

Model engineering sacieties and clubs
There are local and national groups for modelers
and machinists that have meetings and shows. This
can be a good source of meeting people in your area
that not only share your interests but who can also
help you in learning a new ski ll. They may have
tool s that you don 't for special jobs or they may have
experience in an area like heat treating or casting
that you need to learn about. A couple of examples
are the North American Model Engineering Society
in the Midwest (www.modelengineeringsoc.com)
and the Pacific Rim Model Engineering Society in
the West (www.evmes.org). These organizations
each have an annual show that is open to the public.
Many areas also have local metalworking clubs that
mee t monthly. This can be a great source of
infonnation for the new machinist, because it puts
you in touch with people with years of experience
who are willing to share their expertise with you. A

li st of local clubs that have web sites can be found
at http://www.metalworking.comlclubs.html.

Robat boHles on TV
This is a little off the subject of learning about
machining, but a new trend on televi sion has the
potential to bring a new and younger audience into
machining. Several television shows now offer
competition for home-built robots that include speed
and agility tests as well as the ultimate test of a
person's building ability---<:ompetition. While some
robot purist s see thi s as a negative portrayal of
robotic abilities, I see it as an excellent introduction
to the need for precision metal parts for a whole
new group of young thinkers and builders. Shows
like Comedy Central's BattleBots® and Th e
Learning Channel's Robotica® follow the lead
started by a British sho w called " Robot Wars."
Events include racing around a figure "8" course or
through a maze of obstacles. The final winners are
usually detennined in bot-to-bot combat. Although
these " robots" are actually just armored radiocontrolled vehicles, they do exhibit many innovative
features and it requires a great deal of skill to build
a winner. Despite the juvenile over-dramatization
of some of the shows, the heart of the matter is that
they are getting kids thinking about actually building
things that will stand up to the rigors of competition.
I feel this is a healthier trend than encouraging them
to simply lose themselves in video games, and I hope
that its success will lead to more bright kids finding
satisfaction in building things. This is the group that
will become the future engineers and designers who
will shape the invention s of our future.

So universal they made toolbox drawers just to hold it
Toolboxes made for machinists have a number of flat , felt
lined, drawers to hold c utting tools and measuring
instruments. In addition, many have an oddly shaped
vertical drawer right in the center. It was designed to hold
Machinery s Handbook. It was and still is considered as
imponant as any other tool in the machinist's toolbox.
This old machinist s
toolbox was made by
H. Gerstner & Sons.
The company is still
producing high quality
wood toolboxes. The
clock must have been
added by the machinist
who wanted to know
when it \-VaS getting to be
"quinin 'time".

SECTION I-General Machining

Chapter 2- Do you need a lathe, a mill or both?

The lathe and the vertical milling machine each have their place in the machine shop. Though Ihe lathe is
a basic metalworking 1
001, the mill is the workhorse in most machine shops. Unless your need~' are very
limited, you will eventually need the capabilities a/both to be able to accomplish all your machining la.\'ks.
A lathe is a good place for a novice to start. It will
all ow you to find o ut about cutting metal and
requires a smaller investment. I don ' t recommend
buy ing every metal cutting too l in sight until you
know you like cutting metal. Metal cutting is a
complex, slow process that shou ld be enjoyab le
before any large investment is made. I would suggest
that if your funds are limited and you st ill want full
machine shop capabili ties, get started by buying the
best mill you can afford and the least expensive lathe
you can get by with. The reason is that most likely
the majority of critical operations you will perfo rm
will require a vertical milling machine.

Which tool is the most important when getting started?

The lathe is the first comp lex piece of machinery an
apprent ice machinist will use to cut metal. A mill is
the machine an apprent ice machinist wi ll use to
make hi s or her first complex part. Lathes have
always been a great way to learn about cutting metal,
but as soon as you have that urge to build a miniature
version of a steam engine, you' ll find out that a mill
is needed more than a lathe. The truth is, to make
complex parts you need both. I wou ld est imate I
have spent 90% of my time working with a mi ll
compared to a lathe; however, when a part has to be
turned and threaded you need a lathe.
29

The difference between mill and lathe

Milling with a lathe and
vertical milling column aHachment

isn't just square or round parts
The main difference between a lathe and mill is that
the work turns on a lathe while the tool turns on a
mill. Most people believe the difference would be
rectangular vs. round material. This isn't true. A
four-jaw independent chuck can be used to hold a

rectangular part on a lathe. Four-jaw independent
chucks allow the work to be mounted with the center
being wherever you want it. The only problem is
the offset weight of the part can make for a very

out-oF-balance setup. When tools are cutting, the
material being cut doesn't care which is turning, and

the same cutting speed laws govern the process
whether it is a lathe or mill. Old manuals on
machining will show many ingenious setups using
lathes. Mills were slow to catch on because the end
mills we use today were not available. The new tool
steels that improve modern day cutting tools
constantly affect the design of the machine tools to
which they are mounted as engineers take advantage
of these new materials and products.

Sherline has an attachment to turn a lathe into a mill
that works well as long as the work is small enough.
A lathe doesn't have to be as rigid as a mill because
the cutting loads are lower; therefore , in this
configuration the XY portion will not be as rigid as
a mill. This accessory is called the vertical milling
column. It is basically the same as the vertical slide
on the Sherline mill; in fact, the vertical column
attachment that is presently manufactured could be
bolted directly to the XY milling base. The
headstock/motor/speed control assembly from the
lathe is exactly the same as the one used on the mill
and can be switched from one to the other in less
than a minute. This allows a novice to work or buy
. his way into miniature machining a little at a time.
To swnmarize, money saving alternatives that would
allow both lathe and mill operations to be perfonned
would then consist of 1) a lathe with a vertical

milling column, or 2) a lathe and mill XYZ base.
The headstock/motor/speed control unit would be
switched back and forth between the two machines
saving the cost of duplicating a second drive unit.
The first alternative is the least expensive but results
in slightly reduced milling capabilities. If most of
the parts you make are turned on a lathe and you
only occasionally need to do a milling operation this
would be a good choice. The second alternative,
although it takes a few seconds to change drives
from one machine to the other, results in no
compromise in milling capabilities.

Pricing based on the "flinch factor"
In the future we may manufacture a mill that could
be turned into a lathe, but that would result in a
Maybe we'd bener rethink
Ihe pri<ing on this new
o«essory iust 0 bit...

/
A lathe with the optional vertical milling column
allachment allows most milling jobs to be done at
minimal expense. Later, the columll can be added
to the XY base to create a complete mill. The
headstock/motor ullit is thell swapped between the
lathe alld mill which takes only a few seconds. (See
page /76 f or a photo of the new 8-way column.}
30

higher initial investment for customers. I try to come
up with prices that are set by what I call a " flin ch
fac tor". This is w hat prosp ec tive customers
automatically do when they find out what something
costs at a trade show . If they walk away wi thout
ask ing any questions. the price may be too high . If
they take out their hard·eamed money on the spot
and buy one, it may have a price that cou ld be raised.
I price things accordingly, and I don 't necessarily
make the same percent of profit on each item. I try
to make a profit on the overall product line rather
than each item. I guess I will always be morc of a
hobbyi st than a businessman.

a machine in the system you are most fam ili ar with
and for wh ich you already have measuring too ls. If
you grew up with the inch systcm. buy an inch
machine. If you th ink in millimeters. buy a mctric
machine. All Sherline too ls and accesso ri cs arc
offcred in either system at the same price. There is
no sign ifi cant advantage in accuracy to a machine
calibrated in one system as opposed to the other.
Converti ng dimensions from one system to the other
is a pain and a poss ible source fo r errors. If you buy
a metric machine thinking that is the way the world
is goi ng, but you are buying plan s for proj ects that
arc dimensioned in inches and own inch mi crometers, you arc go ing to be in for a lot o f extra work.
Although it is poss ible late r o n to co nve rt a
Sheriinc machine from inch to metric or vice versa,
it involves more Ihanjust swapping hand whee ls as
the leadscrews and nuts must also be changed. In
most cases, the choice of which system 10 usc will
be an easy one for you, and that is to simply choose
the system with which you are most comfortable.

Inch vs. metric machines
Machine tool s come ca librated in either inch or
metric in cre men ts. Choos in g a sys tem of
measurement will be one of the more basic choices
you w ill have to make. Fo r a more thorough
di scussion of the advantages and disadvantages of
each system see C hapte r 5 in this section on
measuring. The si mplest advice I can give is to buy

Finding the right Sherline tool for your needs •••
a guide through the product lineup
The motor and speed control arc the same on all
Sherline lathes and mills, so the difference in too ls
is mainly in size and included features. Assuming
you have made a choice or your system of measurement, I will describe the differences and advantages
of the various machines in the Sherline too l line.

between centers . This is the modern vers ion o f the
o ri gina l Austra lian·designcd Mode l 1000 lathe
introduced in the early 1970's. All Sherli ne lathes
come with a faceplate and d ri ve dog, two dead
centers, hex adjustment keys, tool post, presharpened
114" cutti ng tool and spindle bar.

(NOTE: Where model or product num bers are listed, the inch
version is listed first fo llowed by the metric version in
parenthesis.)

Model ~~OI)-The longer lathe Model 4400 (4410)
has a 24" bed wi th 17" of cl earance between
cenlers. It also comes w ith adjustab le "zero"
handwheel s on the leadscrew, crosslide and lailstock
spindle. It replaces the standard tool post wi th a
rocker too l post. Th is a ll ows yo u to prec ise ly
contro l the hei ght of the cutting edge of the too l.

LATHES
Model 4000- The basic Sherline lathe is the Model
4000 (4IOO) which has a 15" bed with 8" of clearance

The Sherline 3.5 x J 7" Model 4400A lathe

The Sherline 3.5 " x 8" Model 4000A lathe
11

This photo shows the relative size of the two lathes. The main difference is the length of the bed which
provides 8" between centers on the Model 4000 and 17" between centers on the Model 4400. (This photo
shows the older style !ai/stock without the cutout for table clearance which was added in J996.)

What you need will be determined by
the hardness of the ports you intend to make
That gives you the physical limitations of the
machine, but what does the hardness of the material
you wish to tum do to those numbers in the real
world? A good rule to remember when it comes to
purchasing any lathe is to take the average diameter
you plan to work with and multiply that times 3 for
free machining materials and times 4 for tough
materials like stainless steel. If the materials you
plan to work with are free machining (aluminum,
brass and free machining steel), you will be pleased
with a Sherline Lathe if the average part you make
is approximately 1" (2Smm) in diameter. Wood and
plastic are so easy to machine that only size
limitations need be considered. I don't mean to imply
that you can't machine a 3" flywheel , but if you are
planning to consistently make parts ofthat size, you
will probably be happier with a larger machine and
more horsepower. Removing large amounts of metal
on a small machine takes time. If you have lots of
time, the size of the part is less critical. Users of any
machine are happier with its performance when they
are not consistently pushing the limits of its

which gives better control over the cut. This is
particularly useful when using older, resharpened
cutting tools where the height ofthe cutting tip may
have changed when it was resharpened.

Is Sherline's bigger lathe worth the extra money?
Additional capacity may just be wasted if you don't
need it. If you don't need 17" between centers you
might as well save the workbench space and spend
the money you save on more accessories. If you do
need it, however, the relatively small extra cost is
well worth it. The additional 9" of distance between
centers obviously allows larger parts to be worked
on. It also allows for greater versatility in setup and
the use of a larger 3/8" tailstock chuck. Using larger
chucks and tools on the smaller machine is difficult
as the length of the chuck and tool eats up a good
portion of your available 8" leaving little space left
for a part. The longer bed lathe was only introduced
in 1993, but it now accounts for just about half the
Sherline lathe sales. Though more expensive,
because of the extra features it offers as well as the
increased capacity, r feel that dollar for dollar it is
the better bargain of the two.
32

capabili ti es. If you usually make sma ll parts wcl l
wi thin the capabilities of the Sherl ine lathe and every
once in a whi le need to turn a part sized near the
mach ine ' s limits, you will be very sati sfied with the
its perform ance.
Accessory Packages oHer more "bang for the buck"
The accessory or "A" packages are a good
investment for a new purchaser. as they include the
most popular accessories in a package that offers a
price savings over purchasing them se parately.
These are all accessories you would no doubt be
buying anyway, so you might as we ll save some

money. In addition to the standard e quipment
mentioned previously. the "A" packages include a
3-j aw chuck and ta ilstock chuck. chuck key and
arbor with drawbolt to use the tailstock chuck as a
drill chuck in the headstock. A 4-jaw chuck may be
substituted for the 3-jaw if you already have o ne.
but in most cases. the 3-jaw is what most peo ple
will want to start out with. In the case ort he Model
4000A (41 OOA) the 3-jaw chuck is 2.5" in diametcr
and the lailstock chuck is a 114" Jacobs chuck. The
longer Model 4400A (441 OA) includes a larger 3.1 "
3-jaw chuck and a 3/8" Jacobs tailstock chuck ,md key.

VERTICAL MILLING MACHINES
The phy.icallimils of 0 mill

offers an additio nal 2" of Y-axi s trave l compared to
the standard Mill. It also includes a mill headstock
spacer block wh ich adds \-\ /4" to the throat distance
(clearance between the tool and the vertical co lumn).
With the addition of a horizontal milling conversion.
surfaces up to 6" x 9" can be machined withou t
moving the part. Thi s is a very large machinable
area for a tool o r this compact size.

A vertical milling machine is capable of holding
larger parts than a lathe of similar size because the
part is held and only the tool turns. A mill also has a
much lo nger table throw (X-axis). A de luxe
version of the Sherline mill also is avai lable which

Because of its importance in the machine
shop, adding a vertical milling machine was
one of my first priorities when I took over
production of the Sherline 100 1 line in the
earl y 1970's. The standard Sherline mi ll is
the Model 5000 (5100) which has a 10"
base. It has 8" (203mm) of clearance
between the table and spindle. The travels
of the three axes of movement are:
X ~ 9.00" (228mm), Y ~ 3.00" (76mm) and
Z ~ 6.50" (165mm). It has red anodized
handwheels with laser engraved markings.

The Model 5400 Deluxe Mill
An upgraded or " Delu xe" Model 5400
(5410) mill is also available whi ch offers a
12" base. This increases " Y" Ax is travel
from 3.00" to 5.00" (127mm).ltcomes with
a headstock spacer block which increases
the throat distance from 2.25" (50mm) to
3.50" (90mm). (This spacer is availabl e as
an option on the standard mil1.) It also
includes a 1/4" drill chuck , arbo r and
drawbolt. In addition, the base and tabl e
have laser engraved scales cut into them
which makes keeping track of posi tions and
movement s eas ier. Adjustab le "zero"
handwheels are standard on all three axes.
(See photo on page 36.)

Sherline 's basic Model JOOa mill.
33

The Model 5400 mill adds 2" more Y·axis fravel. laser engraved markings, a headstock spacer block and
{/ 11-1" drill chuck and key.

The Model 2000 8·Motion Mill

world- the Bridgeport mill . In ad dition to th e
standard hand wheel adjustable movements of the
X, Y and Z axes, and the pivoting headstock, the
new mill offers four additional movements. The new

The latest addition to the model line is patterned
after the movements avail able on the most widely
used and im itated full si ze machine tool in the
34

The Model 2000 mill takes tabletop machining into the year 2000 and beyond. With eight directions of
movement for the part or tool, a part can be milJed or drilJed from any angle while mounted square to the
table. For more on the development of the new mill see page /93.

round column base allows the column to be moved
in and out and pivoted left or right. The addition of
the rotary column attachment allows the column to
be rotated in a clockwise or counterclockwise
direction up to 90° either way. A "knuckle" on the
back of the rotary column attachment allows the
column to tilt forward or back. Laser engraved
scales on each of these movements make it easy to
set the column to angled settings.

The Model 5000 or 5400 mill s can mill an angle by
rotating the headstock. To drill an angled hole,
however, requires either mounting the part on an
angle or adding th e optional rotary column
attachment. The Model 2000 mill allows a part to
be drilled or machined from any angle while it is
mounted square to the table. These additional
movements bring all the capabilities of professional
mills down to tabletop machine shop size.
35

Naturally, the XY base and the XYZ base can also
be ordered with or without adjustable "zero"
handwheels. Rather than quote even more model
numbers, it's easier just to say that information can
be found on Sherline's web site or in their price list.
My main purpose here was just to let you know they
exist and that any handwheel on any Sherline tool,
new or used, can be replaced with an adjustable one
to make your life a little easier.

Things to ask when buying a used machine
Like full size equipment, a well maintained used
miniature machine tool can be just as good as a new
one and sometimes much cheaper. Check for
obvious signs of abuse like major cuts in the table
or noticeable play in the movement of the parts.
Check for excessive backlash in the leadscrews.
Many people buy machines thinking they will use
them only to find out the hobby doesn't really
appeal to them. Older tools can sometimes be found
that have seen almost no use. I f you happen to find
a good used machine, you can usually check with a
manufacturer to find out if that model is still
available and if parts are still offered for it. With
Sherline tools this isn't a problem, but there are used
tools on the market made by companies that no
longer do business in the United States, and getting
parts for them could be a problem.
Accessories sweeten the deal
If you can find a good used machine for sale ask
what accessories come with it. If the sale includes a
number of expensive accessories, you could be
getting a really good deal. Even if you may not think
you need them now, you'll probably be glad you
have them later on as you learn how to use them.
Check new prices to moke sure it's a good deal
Regardless of the manufacturer, before you buy a
used machine, check the latest factory product
literature for current models and prices. Sometimes
the "bargain" prices asked for used machines might
be only slightly lower than what you would pay for
a new one and you wouldn't be getting any warranty.
Though the product numbers and sizes listed in this
book for Sherline machines are correct at the time
of printing, in the future, additional models and
features will undoubtedly become available.

Adjustable "zero " handwheelsfollow large machine
tool practice by allowing you to return your
handwheel selling to zero at any time without moving
the leadscrew. They can be ordered on new
machines or added as a retrojitlo older machines.
ADJUSTABLE "ZERO" HANDWHEELS
Most expensive full size machine tools allow the
machinist to reset the handwheel to "zero" (or any
desired setting) at any time during the machining
operation. All Sheri inc tools now offer that option.
Operation is simple. Just release the locking nut
while holding the handwheel. Then reset the
handwheel barrel to "zero" and retighten the locking
nut. Now you can dial in the amount of feed you
want starting from zero without having to calculate
your stopping point. It's a great time saver and also
reduces the chance for errors.
If you own an older Sherline machine, the adjustable
handwheels can be ordered separately and swapped
for the standard handwheels. The old handwheels
come off by simply releasing a set screw. The new
ones go on just as easily. If you are buying a new
machine, you can save some money compared to
switching later by ordering a machine with the
adjustable hand wheels already installed. The Model
4400 (4410) lathe and Model 5400 (5410) mill
already come with these timesaving handwheels
installed. It costs about an additional $40 on a lathe
and $60 on a mill to order them with adjustable
"zero" handwheels. This saves about $20-$35 (1998)
over buying them later, plus you don't have to install
them. A standard lathe with adjustable handwheels
is known as Model 4500 (4530). A Model 4000A
(4100A) becomes a Model 4500A (4530A). A
Model 5000 (5100) mill changes to a Model 5500
(5510) when adding the adjustable handwheels.

CNC venions of miniature machine tools
As we move into the 21 st century, the computer will
continue to enter more phases of our lives. One could
not hope to become a production machinist these
days without learning to program a CNC machine.
36

Even one-off and prototype jobs are often done on
machines that offer the option of hand cranking the dials
or using computer controls for appropriate operations.
As machinisl'i become more fruniliarwith using computer
cOnlrolled machines in their work, they sometimes wish
to extend those advantages into the small parts they
make, either at work or at home. Even those who have
never worked with computer control led machines can
learn to use these smaller versions if they have the need
or simply the desire. Just like their larger counterparts,
these machines can take the drudgery out of making the
same part over and over and can also machine threedimensional shapes that would be difficult or impossible
by hand.

(N( machines for education
Educators have fou nd that training new machini sts to
use computer controlled machines is done at much lower
cost using smaJl machines that duplicate all the functions
of the larger ones the futu re machinists wi ll eventuall y
be using. Also, a mistake in a program that causes a
tool to crash into achuck can do some very expe nsive
damage to a full-size machine. It is better to make your
mistakes in miniature as you learn.
Anumber of monufadurers to choose from
Because of the demand for small CNC machines, in
addition to Sherl ine Products, there are now several
companies that offer both conversions for existing
Sherline machines orcomplete, tum-key miniature CNC
machining centers based on Sherline machines. There
is a broad range of price depending on how many "bells
and whi st le" you requi re, but the basic model s are
Il1010, UGIIl """"'" <
__

Stepper motors drive the threaded leadscrews Oil
each of the machine:,' axes to prodllce controlled
movements based 011 coded ;lIstruCtiOIlS sellf from
a computer. They produce good results at a much
lower cost thall the servo motors and ball lead
screws used 011 larger, more expensive CNC
machines. ShowlI here are stepper moton with
lumdwheels moullted to the rear shafts. This provides
the operator the optioll of manual cOl/trol when
appropriate.

amazingly inexpensive. Stripped-down home versions
are avail able, while the educational model s come with
housings and safety features that duplicate those fou nd
on full-size machines. A complete CNC Sherli ne mill
including three stepper motors, four drivers with power
supply and even a new computer with pre- installed
operating system and software can be purchased for
under $2500.00 (2004) with retrofit kits for your own
machine starting under $1800.00. A fourth (rotary) axis
can be added for $395.00. CNC lathes and comp lete
CNC lathe/mill/accessory shop packages are also
ava ilable. Versions where you supply your own
computer offer addit ional cost savings for those who
have the computer skills to install the appropriate
operating systems and software.
A list of compan ies that offer CNC retrofits or complete
machines can be found in the "dealers" section of
Sherline's web site at www.sherline.comlcncdlrs.htm.

"AllY tec/llw/ogy Sf!llicielllly (/dl'(i1/ced is
illdistillguishah/e ./i'Olll lIIagic ..

A CNC machining cellfer designed for educariollal

or industrial use has all the jeafllres of larger sliop
CNC machines, butlhese features add 10 the price.

- Arl hur C. Clarke

A full size Bridgeport vertical milling machine. Unlike its miniature counterpart, this one cannot be stored
on a closet shelfand requires aiorklift 10 move it. The mill shown combines old and new technology. The
handwheels can be cranked by hand or driven by computer numeric control (eNe). The directions of
movement of this machine served as a model for the Sherline Model 2000 mill.
38

SEGION I-General Machining

Chapter 3- Materials for metalworking
I'l0010; 'til WIlli

Some good materials to work with
As with many of the other sections of this book, I
am purposely staying away from engineering data
and only giving the practical infonnation you need
to get started. The book I would recommend for
technical information would be Machinery's
Handbook. This book is the best book ever written
on metals and the machining of metal (See chapter
1 of this section.) As a beginner, I would also avoid
complex parts that require heat treating. If you try
to accomplish this with a torch, you will find it an
excellent way to destroy perfectly good parts. This
can be heartbreaking to novices because they haven' t
"started over" enough in their life. I recommend
using "Icadloy" 12L14 for soft steel parts. "Stress
proof' steel is the next real improvement in steels.
It is a better material that is a little harder to machine.
Use 4130 or 4140 steel for extra strong or tough
parts, 6061-T6 for aluminum parts, and 303 for
round stainless steel parts. These materials are
readily available and work quite well. Ordering stock
sizes that aren't readily available can be a waste of
time. If you only have one part to make, it may take
just a few minutes to cut a piece of stock to its proper
starting diameter, but it could take an hour on the
phone to find the perfect size.

A treasure trove of raw materials can be found at
most scrap yards. Knowing the properties of the
material you are looking/or is helpful, because often
it is not marked.

Eliminate machining time by cuHing
material close to size first
A good investment for your miniature machine shop
is a cutoff saw. There is a saw available at many
discount tool stores that is sold for less than $200
(1998) that is just right for home shop use. It uses a
band saw design and can cut off diameters to four
inches (I OOmm). It can also be used in a vertical
position making a standard band saw out of it. You
need to have a way to cut metal to length in a pleasant
fashion, and, believe me, trying to saw off a large
piece of stock with a hacksaw isn ' t pleasant. It will
drive you out of the hobby faster than anything I
know. When you are working with small machines
it is very important to eliminate as much machining
as possible by cutting stock to its proper length
before starting. A little cutting oil now and then will
help the process and keep blades sharper longer. If
you have a friend with a good saw it is almost as
good, but eventually you' ll want your own.
Cut off tool cautions
A cutoff tool or "parting-off' tool shouldn't be used
in place of a cutoff saw. Cut your material to size
with the cutoff saw, and only use the cutoff tool on
the lathe for separating the finished piece from the
blank. By the way, don't attempt to use a cutoff tool
holder and tool on a lathe at any place other than
close to the three-jaw chuck. It will bind in thE

A good cutoffsaw is an important time-saver in any
shop. Miniature machine tools weren't meant to
remove a lot ofmetal in a hurry, so gelling a rough
parI as close to size as possible with a cutoff saw
saves a lot of time and wear and tear on your
machines.
39

Brass is eajY to work with and polishes up nicely so it is a popular material/or model work. The chips are
like lillIe splinters, so work with it carefully.

material and get ripped out of its holding device and
may end up damaging your machine.

exist to service manufacturing companies that buy
in very large quantities, not for the horne hobbyist.
Sources other than the big industrial suppliers
You will have to order from a supplier that caters to
the hobby market. We have several listed on our
web site and we wish them well because they
provide a service that is well worth the extra cost.
You can order all your materials from one source at
one time. This allows you to spend your time
building things, not talking on the phone to
somebody who considers your order not worth the
effort. If you are a novice, aways buy enough
material to make three parts in case you have to start
over.
Salvage yards
If you are lucky, there could be a salvage yard in
your area that sells bar stock. Bring your own
hacksaw because they will not cut it for you without
a high cutting charge. If you find a good surplus
yard that has useable materials, it might be wise to
anticipate your needs and buy for future use if the

Dealing with minimum arders and small quantities
The choices for metal seem endless, but there is a
problem. It's called the "minimum order". Let's say
you want to start on a project that contains several
types of steel, brass, aluminum, and cast iron.
Chances are each of these products will be sold by a
different supplier; each with their own rules when it
comes to extra charges for small orders. You should
also understand that most bar material used in
machine shops comes in twelve-foot lengths and
material used in construction and fabrication shops
comes in twenty-foot lengths. It may cost as much
as $25 to have a single bar cut to length. If you call
up one of these suppliers and try to order a fourinch piece (I OOmm) of half-inch (12mm) aluminum
they will probably ask if you are joking. You will
then find they will not deliver orders this small and
that it would be cheaper to buy the whole bar rather
than paying the cutting charge. These companies
40

M ILIIll rrelll' MSIl.

Wood can also be machined on miniature machine tools with the lise C?fa tool pOSllosupporl the hand held
cUiting lools. Small items like pens made /rom exotic woods are popular items as gifts. Kits are available
for the working paris of the pen. Because Ihese projects require such small pieces of material you can
afford to use beautiful and exotic wood'i. Low material cost is one of the big advantages o.f working on
small projects.
price is right. Surplus yards don't have a standard
inventory, and just because they may have a good
assortment of material today, it doesn ' t mean it will
be there tomorrow. What is available quite often are
bar ends. These are pieces left over after ? bar of
stock has been cut up which are too short to use for
their particular part. The problem is knowing what
the material is.

splinters and will not tangle a machinc up with long,
stringy chips. Softe r gradcs of aluminum don ' t
machine very well and lack the stiffness requircd in
mechanical parts. The extruded aluminum shapes
sold in hardware stores are usuall y a soft, gummy
aluminum such as 6063-T3. Another type of
aluminum available is the 2000 series which is
usually found in extruded shapes such as rectangles
and squares. The last one worth mentioning is the
7000 series. This grade is commonly used for aircraft
parts and is available in a hardness to T8. Thi s grade
can have a surface hardness equal to some steel s so
it can be very use ful for looling.

Identifying various aluminum materials in a scrap yard
Material is usually color coded with paint on the
end of the bar. I wish I could put a chart of colors
VS. material in this book , but for so me idiotic
reason, each producer has its own colors. Aluminum
will have the grades printed on the entire length of
the bar. The grade I recommend is 6061- T6. The
"T" indicates the hardness. Another grade you may
find in a salvage yard is 2011-T3. This has a texture
si milar to cast iron and it was developed for making
round parts on automatic machines. The chips are

Buying scrap steel is a liHle tougher
A whole new set of problems arises when you try to
buy steel at surplus yards, for it isn't labeled. If it is
rusty, it probably is "hot rolled", which is a terrible
material to work with for small parts. These are
fabrication materials that, as an example, are good
41

~

..

".i _,.~

~

~

... "'_=

ruined in heat treating. Because of the many uses of
steels and the many kinds available, I'm limiting
the information I provide on these materials. I would
end up with a book filled with charts and tables that
would be just like the books that line the shelves of
your library's engineering section. Before starting
on a project that requires heat treating, get the advice
of a local heat treat shop.
The positives and negatives of brass, copper and bronte
Brass is usually sold in a half-hard condition and is
very easy to machine. I don't like to machine it
because the chips are like small splinters that stick
in your hands and break off. However, the parts
always look nice and can be easily polished and
plated. Copper can be machined but the surface has
a tendency to "tear" as it is being cut making for
poor finishes. Diamond tools are used to cut copper
in a production environment if good surface finishes
are a must. Some grades of bronze can also be
difficult to machine because they will wear tools,
even carbide, at an alarming rate.

___ :_
.

--.-

.,

--

'"T""

.. _-

-

-

-

-

--

-_. _.

Aluminum grades are normally printed on the bar
stock. Color coded ends also identify each type of
aluminum, but color coding varies depending on
who produced it.
for making a wrought iron gate. The best steel
material to machine is called «Ieadloy" or 12l 14. It
is available in round and square cross sections and
can be case hardened. Using 12114 will ease much
of the pain of machining steel as it is a pleasure to
cut. Many of the parts of Sherline tools are made of
this material. Excellent finishes are easy to attain.
The chips break as they are machined off,
eliminating the danger of long, sharp chips.
A material called "stress proof' would be the next
real improvement over leadloy. It isn't too expensive
and machines better than cold rolled. Cold rolled
steel is miserable stuff to machine by comparison.
It is tough and gummy and has a low cutting speed,
but it is slightly better for case hardening than
leadloy. Normally you would have to grind it to get
a good finish. For some reaso n that I don ' t
understand, you can cut cold rolled and similar hardto-machine steels at cutting speeds way above the
recommended speeds (as much as four times) and
get a mirror finish. The catch is you have to use
carbide insert tools. These tools can cut machine
times in half and are a basic cutting tool in a
modem machine shop. (See Chapter 6 on Cutting
Tools in this section.) The chips are very hot and
care should be taken to protect yourself.

Cast iron
Cast iron can be purchased as bar stock or cut out of
an old piece of junk that contains cast iron. It is easy
to machine , but also dirty. The chips look like
powdered coal, and you should clean up your
equipment after cutting it. The good part about cast
iron is it is very stable and will not warp as it is
machined. It is surprising how much some materials
can warp when cut. Manufacturers of complex, close
tolerance parts will have materials "normalized"

Tools steels can be hardened completely, not just
the outside as in case hardening, and can be very
expensive and hard to machine. They are used when
high strength or holding a sharp edge is important.
A stamping die would be a good example. I would
recommend that you purchase these materials only
when the material is clearly identified. It takes too
long to make parts out of this material to have them

With the addition of the wood tool rest, small
wooden parts are easy to turn on a Sherline lathe.
Here, exotic woods are used to make a handsome
keyJob and a small flute. Model ships and dollhouse
miniatures also require small turned wooden parts.
42

seve ra l times be twee n mac hinin g operati ons to
co unterac t th ese fo rces. Th e bi gger the part the
bigger the problem unless you are using cast iron.
Woods and plastics
Wood and plastic can be easily mac hined with tools
des ig ned to c ut me ta ls. For be st res ult s whe n
machining wood, use a very hard, fin e grained wood
such as mapl e. Soft woods will crush rather than
cut. This causes poor fi ni shes and splintering. Use
t wo- flut ed e nd mill s w he n mac hinin g t hese
materials.
The proble m with plastic is "melting". You ca n't
allow the chi p to cl og up the cutting acti on when
machining any type of plastic. For example, if a drill
feed is low and the RPM is high, the chips will be
numerous and thin. They pile up in the drill 's flu tes
and not only create heat from friction but also work
as an in sul ator. The plasti c melts and you have
ruined your part. Plastic has a very high temperature
expansion rate when compared with other materials
and it might be wise to take the close tolerance cut s
when the part has cooled down to room temperature.
Use high feed rates and sharp too ls to elimin ate or
minimize these problems.
Don't knock plastic...sometimes it's the
best material for the job
I was at a trade show once when a youngster in hi s
teens stopped by our booth. He brought with him a
com plex part used in the front e nd of a rad io
controll ed model car. It was made out of plastic and

A selectioll l?{p/aslic raw materials. Tile dark b rOIl'll

block ill Ihe upper left is phenolic. Next to il is black
Delrill . The red block isftberglass. At the far left is
a piece of white Delrill alld IIext to it is a block of
white NyIOl I. The two piles {Ire nell' clear beads and
recycled black chips IIsed for injection molding.

the pan was constantly fai ling in crashes. He wanted
to buy a mach ine to bu il d thi s part icul ar part out of
metal and save mo ney. He though t he was getti ng
ripped off because the plast ic parts cost $3.00 each.
I told hi m J could not build a part to replace the one
he showed me in less th an six hours and a meta l
part probab ly woul d not last any lo nger, because
meta l will not spring bac k to its original shape like
the plastic pan . I don' t think he ever understood why
it would take me six hours to makc a three-dollar part.
Plastics have changed the way we think about va lue.
To inj ec tio n mo ld a c o m pl ex pa rt, it takes a
com plex mold, yet the machine cycle time and the
skill to run thi s plastic injec ti o n machin e re main
constant. The mac hine time is based on the thickest
cross-secti on, nol the co mpl ex ity of the parI. In
order for the mold to work it must be made with
very tig ht tole rances. eve n if th e pa rt itself has
li beral tolerances. Wi th a good mo ld, plastic parts
can be manu fac tu red so inexpe nsive ly we consider
them disposable, bu t don' t think fo r a moment that
all plast ic parts are junk.
Ta ke fo r example yo ur new ce llul ar pho ne. T he
molded fo rms of the body woul d be ve ry diffi cult
to produce in any material other than plastic. They
are sturdy, light in weight and have the desired color
molded in so they do n' t have to be painted. If they
were made out of metal they would be heavier, more
ex pensive and no more attract ive. Plasti cs can be
fo rmul ated to ac hi eve j ust abo ut a ny des ired
characteristic from fl ex ibili ty to heat res istance to

A plastic mold IIsed to make a hOllsing for tile nell'

digital readollt for a Sherlille mill. It call take a very
expensive mold to prodtlce what looks like a simple
pa rt. Th e IOll ger the machine runs, however, the
cheaper the parts become.
43

PH<)IO, , ..... " " _ "

color or clarity. The development of plastics in our
lifetime is probably the most important advance in
materials since the discovery of how to work with
metals many centuries ago.

Buying plastic for molding and machining
Plastic can be purchased in granular form for
injection molding or in bar stock for machining. For
machining I prefer Nylon where strength is
important and Delrin for general work. In bar form,
plastic can be very expensive. A two-inch diameter
Delrin rod may cost over one dollar per inch
compared with two dollars a pound in granules for
injection molding (1998). Injection molded
products are the preferred choice for use in
manufacturing. As always, the tooling costs are high
in order to produce a low cost part. If you are
thinking about a new product to be produced in high
volume you have to consider using plastic.
Machining plastics
Machining plastic can be fun. You don't need
coolant and the chips are easy to control and clean
up. Use an RPM that allows heavy feed rates and
use sharp tools. This will keep the plastic part from
melting as it is being machined. When drilling holes
use a very fast feed rate to keep the drill flutes from
clogging. We ran a very profitable screw machine
part by drilling a hole in Delrin at 10 times the
suggested rate. The plastic would extrude out the
flutes without generating any heat yet the drilled
hole had a better finish and tolerance than our
previous slower method. Remember that the
surface of plastic is slippery and softer than metal.
You have to consider this when work is held in a
vise or chuck. Thin sections can be easily deformed
when clamped. Temperature is also a factor. Plastic
has a high coefficient of expansion, and a two-inch
part can vary several thousandths of an inch from a
hot day to a cool day.

This 7" high display model ofa 1911 "Baby" model
airplane engine by Edwin Teachworth was built
entirely ofstyrene and painted to look like metal. It
is on display in the San Diego Aerospace Museum.

an anti-galling agent on close fits. It is available in
automotive shops.
Hard-ta-find fiffing.
Novices believe that some catalog somewhere will
always have what they need, and all they have to do
is order it. This is not always the case. Many
catalogs are filled with sizes that won't actually be
produced unless they get a substantial order. When
you try to use "off-the-shelf' items, you often must
compromise your design. Of course, I'm not
suggesting that you make things like nuts or bolts,
but you might have to make that special washer.
There are plans around for interesting projects that
were drawn with the materials that were available
then. (Try and buy a BSA screw at your local
hardware store and you will understand the
problem.) Unless you are building "super scale", you
can save yourself a lot of grief and use the materials
and fasteners available today. Fortunately, you have
chosen a hobby that gives you an alternative if the
exact part you are looking for can't be found. You
can always make it yourself.

Galling of materials in close fits
In summary, I find aluminum the nicest material to
work with. It is clean, strong and rust free. You
should also be aware that aluminum can "gall",
which is the surface of one part sticking to another
of the same materiaL This usually happens when
you check a fit by putting a shaft in a hole made of
the same material. Stainless steel can be just as bad
as aluminum when it comes to galling. If you have
to do a lot of work in these two materials plan to use
44

SECTION I- General Machining

Chapter 4- Processes for metalworking
Thi s chapter contains information on the processes
used to harden, plate, finish, cast and join metals.
Whi le some of these processes can be done in the
home shop, a number of them are best sent out to a
vendor as they require equipment and processes that
are not practica l to se t up in a home s hop .

documented so that proper heat treat information
is used.

Case hardening vs. fool steels
Tool steels harden a ll the way througll and case
hardened stee ls arc o nl y hardened on the out er
surface of the part. Thi s g ives a very hard sll rfnce
that can be controll ed by the time it is heated to
harden to a specifi c depth. The part is brought to
temperature lin a cyanide bath where carbon atoms
change the makeup of the sur face to all ow it to be
hardened. There isa limit to the depth of thi s process
(up to .0 10" or .25mm). but r.ase hardeni ng is
inexpens ive in production quan tit ies. You can case
harden low carbon steels in a home workshop with
a marvelous material ca ll ed "Kascnite". Alier the
pan has been brought to abou t 1650° F it is dippcd
into the powdered Kasenite. The powder adds carbon
atoms to the sur face. allowing the surface to be
hardened. You can get more depth wi th thi s process
by repeati ng it several times.

Understanding these processes, whether you attempt
them yourself or not, is an interesting part of working
with metal.

4.1-HEAT TREATING
Some "do-it-yourselfers" have more success than others
I've got to be honest with you, heat treating is
someth ing I know less about than I'd li ke to. After
investi ng three days labor in a part on ly to destroy it
trying to heat treat it myself, I decided to have
contract heat treating companies take care of the
small amount of heat treat work I generate. If you
have a small heat treating fu rnace avai lable capab le
of heating up to 2000°F you can do simple heat
treating jobs. If you plan to make parts that require
heat treating I would use "air hardening" steels suc h
as A-2 for standard use or S-7 for parts subject to
shock loads. Don ' t consider using a torch unless
you're treating a very small part made of drill rod. It
is very important that the type of steel you use is

Hardening your own parts
The part should be placed in a sta inle ss stcel
"envelope" to protect it from excess ox idation. The
stainl ess is 316 shim stock whi ch is .002" thick and
goes by the trade namc of "Too l wrap". It is vcry
thin and can be eas il y folded . The envelopc should
be as small as possi ble and sea led with a sharp fold.
Stainless steel wire can also be used to ho ld thc
envelope in place . A heat treat furnace is a must
and the temperature must be accurately contro llcd.
Be sure the work is a ll owed to "soak" at th e
recommended sett ing so that the entire part has time
to be brought to the proper temperature. A general
guideline is one hour for cach inch ofthickness. The
makeup of the material you are dealing with in heat
treating must be known to properly heat treat metal s,
and th ese rule s mu st be followed exactl y. T he
temperatures used in heat treating arc very closc to
the melting point of the material. The parts being
heat treated must be heated evenly. An acety lene
torch used carelessly may " burn" the corners off
wh ile never gelli ng the center of the part hot enough
to be hardened.
Rotkwell testing for hardness
After the part has been hardened it is reheated to
"draw" the pan to a spcci fic hardne ss. The lower

oven
to
almost to their melting points making temperature
control critical.
45

Hardening and aging aluminum
Aluminum can be hardened at much lower
temperatures than ferrous materials. A period of
scveral days after heat treating may be required to
get to the required hardness. This is called "'aging".

the drawing temperature the harder the part. As steel
gets harder it also becomes more brittle. The
numbers arrived at will usually be a compromise. There
are several ways to determine the hardness, the most
popular being "Rockwell" testing. A diamond point
is pressed into the surface of the hardened part and
the amount the diamond penetrates the surface at a
given pressure can determine the hardness.

4.2-MnAl FINISHES
Black oxide
There are a variety of finishes that can be put on
metal. A popular finish for steel parts is "black
oxide". This is basically "gun bluing" and a gun shop
would be a good place to purchase small amounts
of the material needed to do this at home.
Fingerprints that haven't been removed can leave
blemishes on the final product in all plating
processes. You have to work in a very clean way in
a very messy process to do plating. If you have a
plating company do a small job for you , it may save
money if you don't demand fast service so they can
run the part with a larger order.

A Rockwell lester is used for determining the
hardness ofa material by measuring the penetration
(~f a diamond point into the material 's surface.
If you ever have the time, look up the ingredients in
a good steel and compare these ingredients to
stainless steeL The ingredients may be close, but
the final product is entirely different. In most cases,
stainless can't rust and is non-magnetic. I would
recommend working with popular, common
materials ... nothing exotic. Talk to your local heat
treat company for suggestions.

These parts have a tough black oxide finiSh. This
finish is often used on guns as it offers good
protection as well as a nice looking blue-black c%r.

AHempting plated finishes at home
There aren' t many other plating methods that can
be done without building special equipment. The
process of plating is more electrical than chemicaL
I've seen some interesting articles over the years on
how to build plating tanks and rectifiers to
accomplished plating at home. Some craftsmen
prefer to control the quality of every step of their
project. I believe the average machinist would be
heading in a direction with little rewards if they try
plating at home. The chemicals are difficult to buy
in small quantities. It would be like developing your
own film if you only used one roll of film a year.

Annealing is the opposite of hardening
The term "annealing" is used frequently and is
basically the opposite of hardening ferrous steels.
As an example, materials that have been work
hardened by machining may have to be annealed
after being " roughed out" to size. Annealing is
usually accomplished by heating the part to a
temperature determined by the composition of the
material and allowing it to cool slowly. Nonferrous
metals can be annealed by heating them to the
desired temperature and quenching them in water.
46

Anodized finishes like the black of the table and the red of the ham/wheels provide a tough, ewy-to-carefor finish on aluminum parts. In this case, they also provide the additional benefit of helpill)!, the laser
engraved marking!)· show up in high contrast. The laser cuts through the jinish info the raw aluminum
underneath making what appears to be white lellering. Several other colors of anodized finish are also
available. The process gives a good looking finish and is not particlllarly expensive.
Chromium plating is a multistep process

Decorative chrome plating like you see on automobile bumpe rs doesn't wo rk we ll for sma ll
machined parts. The process has several steps and
the first step is to plate copper on to the steel
surface. The copper is po lished and a plating of
nicke l is then added to the surface. Nickel has a
"smoothing" effect to the surface but also has a slight
yellow co lor. Chrome is then plated on the nickel in
very small amounts which gives you a beautifu l
finish for bumpers, but it is not too good for precise
mechanical parts. This is because the chroming
process is done in layers with lots of polishing, and
detail can be lost in small parts. Plating also builds
up more on comers than flat surfaces, and chrome
is so hard that it can't be machined off. A tapped
hole on a part that has been plated may cause
problems even if you use an oversized tap. The fi rst

This /112 scale
model a/a
blacksmith "s
trip hammer by
Jerry Kiefler
remains
unpainted to
show that no
fillers were llsed
or mistakes
covered up.
Sf)melimes Ihe

ullimatejinish is
no jinish al all.
47

thread may build up with plating material and the
remaining threads will not be plated. Plating doesn't
get into holes unless special electrodes are used. A
tapped hole that will not accept a standard machine
screw may be the result in this type of plating
process. Remember, a polished steel surface can
have the appearance of chrome ifit is done properly.

Hard anodizing
Just like hard chroming, the anodizing process has
hard anodizing. This allows the surface to be built
up with one of the hardest materials on earth,
aluminum oxide. It can be used to protect the surface
against wear; however it isn't very strong and can
only be applied a few thousandths deep. One half
the thickness of the plating will be impregnated into
the metal and the other half will be added to the
surface. As an example. if a I" diameter bar were
hard anodized .002". the bar's diameter would
increase by .002". This is somewhere around the
maximum amount you can hard anodize. If
machining is attempted on a part that has been
anodized. enough material should be cut on the first
pass to keep the cutter from rubbing on the anodized
surface. Carbide tools will help but the oxid e
surface is still harder than carbide.

Hard chroming has specific uses
There is another chrome plating process called "hard
chrome". This is expensive and doesn't give the
shiny surface usually associated with chrome. The
process is controlled by carefully positioning the part
and electrode to control where the chrome is
applied. This method is used to create a good wear
surface. Molds that are subject to abrasive materials
have their cavities hard chromed. Hard chrome has
to be polished or precision ground. It is also used as
a "putting on tool" to save a worn or undersize shaft.
but the home hobbyist may find the cost of doing
this too expensive. When one-off parts are hard
chromed you can expect the cost to be over one
hundred dollars.
Barrel plating large quantities of small paris
Barrel plating is a production method used on small
parts. Screws would be a good example of this type
of plating. The parts are not "racked" one at a time
but are plated by the barrel as the name implies.
Nickel and cadmium finishes are commonly used
with this process.

Though not particularly exotic and cf::rtainly not
expensive, a nicely done painted finish does add
realism and appeal 10 a model. An airbrush will
give the most control, but good technique with a
spray can yields good results too.

Colored anodized finishes on aluminum
Anodizing is the preferred method of finishing
aluminum. This is a method that forms aluminum
oxide on the surface. Parts will have their surfaces
grow slightly with this process. The oxide finish has
a "porous surface". This allows it to accept colored
dyes with excellent results. Black and red are two
colors that anodize well. The surface is then "sealed"
with hot water, but please don't ask me how that
works. You should realize that colors will vary
because of the many variables that take place in the
process. It is not an exact science unless you are
willing to pay for new chemicals and test runs. I
would not bid a contract part if I had to be
responsible for the plating color. Many perfectly
good parts have found their way to the scrap heap
because a buyer didn't like the color. This is one of
the reasons I gave up contract machining. There are
a hundred way s to lose, and you only win if
everything goes exactly as planned.

There's always goad old paint
Painted finishes need special attention when working
on miniature replicas of machines. You just can't
slap on a couple of coats of paint and be satisfied
with your work. You should carefully mask the
surface to keep paint off the areas where it shouldn' t
be. A primer should be used to assure the proper
adhesion of the paint. This should be applied in very
light coats. I have always preferred lacquer based
paints because a surface can be built up with many
coats to get the desired results. The inside comers
must be painted using very light, dry coats or the
lacquer may pull away from these areas because
paint shrinks as it dries. Enamels may wrinkle if a
second coat is added without allowing enough
48

drying time between coats. The thinners in the paint
must be allowed time to evaporate before the next
coat is applied.

can be attac hed to the part in a manner to allow
vari ations in length whi ch is normal to the casting
process. The part is then machined to its final length
as the sprue is eu t from the cast ing.

4.3 CASTINGS

Making molds for investment casting
The ceramic mold is made by coating the wax
pattern with a slurry mi x that air dries. It may take
several layers to get the des ired thickness. The wax
is then removed from the inside of the mold wit h
steam or heat. This leaves a mold with no part ing
r
line. The cerami c mold is then heated to over I nono
to harden it and burn away any remnants of the wax.
After the mold has been fill ed with molten metal
and cooled, the mold is destroyed as it is broken
away from the cast ing. This is call ed " precision
investment casting". The part is produced by casting
or machining a wax modcl of the final product. If
many parts must be made, a mold can be built to
cast the wax pattern. The molds can be simple if
you are wi lling to accept some second operat ions
machining the wax pattern.

There are many ways to cast metal parts, but this is
not a process I would recommend trying at home.
This section is provided as general information so
you have some idea how metal casting is done. If
you are one of those builders who likes to do every
operation yourself. read up on casting techniques
before buying or building any equipment.

Casting techniques from the jewelry trade
work well for small parts
The type of castings that could be used for miniature
projects at home actually come from the jewelry
trade. They have developed a sma ll centrifugal
casting machine that slings the molten metal into a
ceramic mold that has been made by the " lost wax"
method. Commercial casting companies use a sprue
system . This is a method of getting molten metal to
the mold and casting more than one part at a time . It
resembles a funnel and many parts may be cast at
one time by pouring molten metal into the sprue
system which feeds each part. The top of this
assembly has provision for a small pool of molten
metal to continue to feed the parts as they cool and
shrink . They call thi s assembly a "tree". The sprue

Shrink rates of various cast
materials must be considered
The model must have the appropriate amount of
shrink rate figured in so the final casting is to size.
If the wax model was machined, the shrink rate of
the wax doesn' t have to be figured in, but if it is
cast it has to be calculated from information that is
available from the companies that manufacture wax.
If you want a close tolerance cast part it may be
worth the effort to run a test part to determine the
shrink rate for a particular shape. The test part does
not need the detail the final product has, just the
general size and shape. From this information a wax
pattern can be built that is surprisi ngly accurate. This
is a very acc urate process and parts like turbine
blades for jet engines are made thi s way. The part
fini sh of small model parts will usually duplicate
that of its full size counterpart. It is possible to cast
many types of metals with this method. Making the
wax pattern and having a professio nal castin g
company do the fin al casting may be the way to go.
By taking off on tangents like this you may end up
neve r completing what you started and end up
makin g jewelry , but projects done in ho me
workshops are for fun so do whatever you enjoy.
As you can see, it takes a lot of steps to make a
good casting and if you' re only making one part, it
could be easier to machine it from bar stock and
sandblast it to get the look of a cast piece.

Die cast lathe bases as they come from the foundry
and before they are machined. Proper draft angles
and shrink rates must be considered in the design
so that the parts will release from the mold and end
up the right size.
49

Die casting for commercial parts
Most complex metal shapes found in commercial
products are " die cast" . The molds are similar to
injection molds for plastic. These molds are built to
withstand internal pressures of 10,000 P.S.1. (1800
kg/cm 2). These types of molds are very expensive
and should only be considered for production parts
made in high quantities. As an example, the
Sherline steady rest mold would cost over $10,000
to replace. Molds of this type are attached to the
platens of die casting machines. The hot side is fixed
and the ejection side can be moved. Leader pins align
the two halves with the utmost precision as the mold
is closed. These machines are rated by how many
tons of force it would take to spread the two halves
apart once they have clamped. A I ~O-ton machine
would be considered small. They may use a pastcenter clamping arrangement or a hydraulic cylinder
to keep it closed. After injecting molten material
into the mold, the casting is allowed to cool for
several seconds. Cooling time is dependent on the
thickest cross section of the part and the cooling
method. When the ejector side of the mold is pulled
away from the hot side, a plate on the ejector side is
pushed forward. Attached to this plate are ejector
pins. Die casting molds may have over fifty pins.
These pins push the part from the mold and let it
drop out. The mold then closes to start the sequence
over again. I believe mold making is the best and
most interesting job in the machine trades, but it is
very demanding. The parts you work with daily are
too valuable to get careless and screw one up.

A mahogany pattern ;s the first step in the sand
caslingprocess. A skilled patternmaker requires not
only a knowledge ofthe properties ofmetal and how
it will react as it cools, but also requires masterful
woodworking skills. Here Howard Parry applies a
wax bead to an insidejoinl. A heated metal ball 1001
is used to shape the wax into the desired radiusfillet.
harden with temperature. The cores are very fragile
and are designed to be this way so they can be
broken into small pieces to remove them from the
finished casting. Cores are held in place by the
parting line of the mold. The two halves are put
together and molten metal is poured into the mold
through the sprue system. The sprue system will
normally have an extra pool of melted material that
helps keep the mold filled while the metal cools.
After the metal is cooled the sand is knocked away
from the part and the sprues are removed. It is
difficult to get the degree of accuracy needed in
miniature models with sand castings, but they are
an inexpensive method to produce large parts in low
quantities. The base for our 24" (609mm) lathe is
produced by the Edelbrock Company. They have a
sand casting facility that is second to none. They
use automated equipment that can fill a mold every
45 seconds. The sand molds are made in two halves
by automatic machines. The molds are also a cast
product and are usually aluminum. I made a model
of what I wanted and they used this model to build
a three-cavity mold. The tooling cost was less than
$5000.00 and the part price was reasonable by doing
three at a time. You may be familiar with the
Edelbrock name because they manufacture many
fine products like manifolds and other performance
parts for hot rods and race cars.

Sand casling ...an old method that is still in use today
The oldest method of casting metals which is still
used today is sand casting. The tooling to produce
cast parts can be a wooden (usually Honduras
Mahogany) model of the finished product you want
to cast. The expert craftsmen who make these
wooden molds are called pattemmakers. The trade
requires not only good woodworking skills, but a
vast knowledge of how metal will react when
molded. Shrink rate has to be accounted for and draft
angles are needed on sides that would otherwise drag
when the wooden model is lifted from the sand. The
model is set in a "box" and sand is packed around
one halfofthe model. The opposite side is done the
same way and the model usually has some method
to increase the accuracy of this process. At the same
time a sprue system is added. Sand used in sand
casting has been treated to stick together. A hollow
section in the casting can be obtained by having a
"core". Cores arc made ofa processed sand that will

Casting using matched plates and gravity
There is also a method of casting that uses matched
plates. This is simply a metal mold made in two
50

halves. The major difference between these molds
and die cast molds is the cavity is filled by gravity,
not the very high press ure s used in die cast
molding.

Dealing with foundries to get your parts
made at a price you can afford
Most foundries specialize in only one material. It
could take several different foundries to get the parts
you need and each one may have a minimum order.
Be sure to remind the foundry that this is a model
proj ect where time isn ' t as important as money, and
see ifit would be possible to run your job with other
commercial parts to keep the price low. You have
to be nice to large casting companies who are willing
to take an order to run a few parts for you even
though they probably still wouldn't make a profit
on them at twice the price.

The quality ofcastings that come in kits variesfrom
good like the ones shown above to downright
unusable.

Beware of poor castings in some kits
Many steam engine kits contain castings that
belong in the junkyard. The tolerance of the part
can be lost in a defonned casting. The manufacturers
of these castings do the industry a disservice by
selling castings of poor quality. A novice may
believe they are at fault when a kit can't be finished.
but the truth could be the castings are in error. The
sorry part is that sometimes these novices g~ve up
and go on to another less demanding hobby because
of it. Kits should always be designed to make the

project easier and more fun to build. If the model
engine kit manufacturers would switch to precision
investment casti ngs for thei r kits, both manufac turer
and customers would benefit.
4.~THER

WAYS TO FORM METAL

Extrusions
Extrusions are something we are very familiar with
at Sherline. Most of the cross sections for the lathe
and mill started out as an ex trusion. The basic
method ofprodueing a extruded shape is similar to
decorating a cake. The frosting is forced through a
hole which gives the material coming out the shape
of the hole . A cross section with a hole can be
extruded by forcing the material around a co re piece
that is shaped like a torpedo.
It takes a lot of power to push a SOO·pound billet of
aluminum through a small hole, so the first thing
you need to extrude metal is a gigantic hydraulic
ram . The aluminum billet is heated but not melted
as it is loaded into the cylinder. The method of
loading is simi lar to loading a cartridge into the
barrel of a rifle. The aluminum shape will usually
be twisted and crooked as it leaves the extrusion
die. This shape is then pulled from both ends to
straighten it. It is the same method used to straighten
a piece of wire or copper tubing only the forces used
to straighten a shape with a large cross section are
tremendous. Thi s method doesn ' t allow tight
tolerances. At Sherline we have to machine all
mating parts on the extrusions we buy.
Extrusion dies are relatively inexpensive , around
$1 ,000, and the cost to produce these dies has come
down because of a new machine tool called a "wire
EDM". A wire about .0 10 inches in diameter cuts
the shape as it is fed through the part by using the
"spark erosion" method. The wire never touches the
part it is cutt ing. The sparks that jump the small gap
between the wire and the part erode the material
away. Thi s isn' t a fast process, but it does the
impossible. The tool steel die can be heat treated
before the shaped hole is cut. The table is computer
controlled and very accurate. A process called "cold
drawn" is also used to more accu rate ly shape
extruded parts in metals. This is similar to extruding
but it is accompli shed in more than one pass.

Forging
Forging is taking a slug of metal and reshap ing it in
a die mounted in a press that acts li ke two giant
51

hammers hitting the part at the same time. One of
the main advantages of this process is the strength
of the part produced. The "grain" of the metal can
be controlled by forging making the part much
stronger and less likely to fail. It isn't something a
home hobbyist could do but worth mentioning.

tip with a rag. Repeat until you get the desired
results ... a shiny silver tip on the iron. It is then ready
to use.

Soldering torches and solid (ore solder
For larger parts that have to be heated with a torch
a paste flux must be used. This keeps the area around
the joint clean as the part is being heated. Propane
torches are somewhat dirty and flux is a must.
Acetylene torches work better but they are too costly
for the average hobbyist. In general, solder will flow
towards the heat source (evenif it is uphill). It is
usually best to heat the side with the most mass and
apply the solder to the opposite side. Always use a
little flux and solder to transfer heat from the iron to
the part. When soft soldering a part that is dependent
on the strength of the joint use a solder that contains
about 65% or more lead. A 60% tin content is used
for soldering electronic circuit boards and cabling.
Flux should always be removed from the joint after
the solder has hardened. It will cause a corrosion
problem because it contains acid. You can also wipe
the excess solder and flux away with a rag before
the joint has hardened. Plumbers use this trick to
get an excellent appearance when they solder copper
tubing. In general, soldering is a skill that has to be
learned, and the best way to learn is by doing. Try
soldering on a similar piece of scrap material before
trying to solder a part that may contain a lot of work.

Quality wrenches are forged. This method can be
more exact than you could imagine. On TV I saw a
complete frame for a handgun made in a few
seconds by forging, and it was a very complicated
part. Forging tooling can be quite expensive.

Powdered or sintered metal parts
Powdered metal parts are made in a specialized press
that compresses "powdered metal" from both the
top and the bottom at the same time. This produces
a part that has a more equal density than one hit
from only one side. The cast part then goes through
a "sintering oven" where the powdered metal is
fused together. Additional strength can be added by
filling in the microscopic voids with a material such
as copper. After sintering a piece of copper is placed
on the part and it is run through the furnace again. If
done correctly the copper will disappear into the part
making it stronger. Door locks are usually
manufactured in this manner.

4.5---JOINING MOll
Soldering irons and flux (ore solder
The method of putting two pieces of metal together
that most hobbyists are familiar with is soldering.
This type of soldering is called "soft soldering". Soft
solder melts at temperatures below 800°F and is a
combination of lead and tin. Hobbyist have built
many ingenious devices by soldering together
piano wire and brass tubes. These standard items
are sold in hobby shops and are used to build gadgets
that are held together with solder. The first thing
you find out about soldering is the surfaces to be
joined have to be clean and free from oxidation. A
flux is used to clean and protect the surface from
oxidation as the parts are heated. Many solders have
a flux core. These are fine for work that will be
heated with a soldering iron. If you are heating the
part with a soldering iron, the iron should be cleaned
by wiping. If a new iron is used or a thin coat of
solder doesn't cover the tip of the iron, the tip of the
iron has to be "tinned". This is accomplished by a
dipping the tip of the hot iron directly into the flux
and melting solder on the tip and then wiping the

Here's a close-up detail ofpart of the blacksmith's
triphammer shown on page 47. The silver soldered
parts are perfectly joined, filleted and finished to
look like castings. Jerry Kieffer's skills as a
mode/maker are highlighted by the number of
different metalworking techniques he has mastered.
52

Brazing and silver soldering provides more strength
When strength is critical brazing s hould be
considered. Brazing materials melt above 800°F and
below the melting temperature of the material s
being brazed. Some brazing materials may penetrate
the surface of the materials beingjoined giving very
strong joints. They will always "wet" the surface
for <l successful braze. Silver solder is probably the
best known brazing material. It is expensive but it
is also used in such small amounts that cost shouldn't
be an issue. Flux is a must and surprisingly it is
usually water based. Liberally apply the flux to the
area around the joint and heat the work in such a
way that you don't boil off the flux. I usually use a
soft flame to start and get the water out of the flux.
This will leave a white coating. The part is then
brought up to silver soldering temperature. More
flux may have to be added to insure clean soldering
surfaces. Heat the silver solder rod and dip it into
the flu x. This coating will protect it from oxidizing
as it is applied. Just like soft so ldering, the melted
brazing material will go towards the heat. Try to
bring the work up to temperature evenly and apply
the brazing material to the opposite side of the heat
source. I have found that when the flux melts and
wets the surface ofthe joint the temperature is ready
for the silver solder to be added. If it doesn't flow
the work temperature must be raised. Keep adding
flux if necessary. Holding any material s at high
temperatures for a long period of time with a torch
can cause problems. Propane torches are usually not
hot enough to silver so lder large parts success fully.
They also have a dirty flame that creates problems
at the higher temperatures used in silver soldering.
If you attempt to silver solder with propane you must
use an excess of flux.

A close.up of an expert weld in aluminum shows a
good, even bead with proper penetration. Like all
skills, we/ding lakes a lot ofpractice and a good
knowledge of your tools and materials to get good
results. Being able to do some basic we/ding is
probably one of the more useful skills you can
obtain. Though not often used in miniature
machining, it can come in handy fiJr many other
construction and repair projects you will rim acrO!iS.

Arc welding
The small parts normally made with Sheri inc tools
are too small for arc welding, which is the most
common way to weld. Unlike brazing, welding is a
process which melts the material being joined and
the joint can be as strong as the original material.

Some welding shops specialize in exotic metals.
Welding titanium such as this Mako mountain bike
frame requires special tools and a lot ofskill. The
advantage gained here is a/rame thai weighs 2.5
pounds instead of the 5 pounds it would weigh if
made from steel.
,oumnOl""WUUOITI""""WI..-

Some sample aluminum welds. Controlling the
puddle of molten metal is the key 10 a good weld.
53

There are several ways to weld, and the difference
is mainly where the heat comes from. Low voltage
and high amperage is the usual source. Arc welding
starts by dragging a flux coated rod across the weld
joint until an arc is established. A very steady hand
is required to control the end of the rod that may be
10" away from handle and clamp that is holding the
rod. The puddle of molten metal is controlled by
minute movements. Good welders can arc weld a
perfect joint standing on their heads if need be. A
poor quality weld in a hard to get place can fail as
easil y as a weld on the front side. The weld
temperature is controlled by the machine settings
and rod diameter. The "ground" has to be perfect to
weld properly. Welds must be perfect for they must
hold buildings, bridges and a large part of the
industrial world together. Our lives are much more
dependent on the skill of this group of tradesmen
than one would think.
Spot welding

Resistance or spot welding is very common in our
lives. It holds together most of the automobiles that
we drive daily. It is a quick process but only certain
materials can be spot weld successfully. The metal
is clamped together by two copper tips. A short blast
of electrical energy is fed across the joint and the
metal fuses together. The welds done at automobile
factories are now done by CNC robots and have
thankfully eliminated this job from assembly lines.
r have used spot welders that are very small and
called " tweezers welders. They can be used to
attach thin shim stock to thicker parts.
GMAW welding (or MIG welding)
Another type of welding that is becoming very
popular is technically known as GMA W welding
which stands for "Gas Metal Arc Welding", but it
is more popularly called MIG welding. An inert gas
such as argon floods the area to keep oxygen away
from the melted surface. The welding material is a
spool of wire that is mechanically fed dowa the
center of the welding cable. It comes out through
the torch through the center of a ceramic cup where
the inert gas is also streaming out. The rate and
amperage has to be adjusted so the material will
melt at the same rate it is fed. The first time I tried it
I moved the torch away from the work and in less
than a second I had a 6" long wire that was incredibly
hot. I realized this was going to take some getting
used to. MIG welders have come down in price over
the years and can be useful to build stands and
trailers, but it would be hard to find a use for them

Though an oxylacetylene torch may be the first thing
many of us think of when we hear the word
"welding most industrial welding is done using
electrical current as a heat source. Shown here is a
TIG (Tungsten Inert Gas) welding setup that brings
the price down in the "home shop " range. This/oot
pedal controlled unil sells Jor about $1300 (1998)
with the wheeled cart adding another $/70.
" J

on parts normally associated with miniature
machining.

TlG welding
TIG (Tungsten Inert Gas) welding is a method that
may be of some use when working with small parts.
The tungsten rod is located in the center of a
ceramic cup that directs an inert gas such as argon
over a clean surface that is going to be welded. A
high frequency contact is made between the work
and the tungsten tip. An arc is established and the
high frequency is turned off automatically. The size
of this arc can he very accurately controlled by
machine settings and a foot pedal similar to an
accelerator. You have to hold the tungsten very close
to the work to TIG weld. The diameter of the
54

tungsten has to be proper for the welding machine
settings to keep it from melting. Ifa weld is critical,
any tungsten that falls or is broken off in the weld
must be ground out. If the tungsten is dipped into
the melted puddle, the melted material will attach
itself to the tungsten and fonn a small glob. When
this happens the torch is hard to control and an arc
may suddenly shoot out on an angle and destroy a
delicate part. The point of the tungsten must be
shaped to a point to accurately aim the "flame". I
prefer a fine tip with an elliptical shaped taper going
to the outside diameter of the tungsten . One thing
that you can do with TIG welding is fuse two pieces
of metal together. Stainless steel can easily be fused
together and .... ery delicate welds can be done by
fusing. When welding very small parts a "chill
block" may have to be used to protect the main body
of the part from excessive heat. These arc usually
made of copper and clamped just below the weld.

lot more practice to be really good at any of them.
On the other hand, trying your hand at something
really helps you appreciate a good job when you
see it done by an expert in the field . and there is a
certain satisfaction in simply knowing a good piece
of work when you sec it. Books have been written
about each subject mentioned and yo u really need
to understand the process more than I described it
before attempting welding or brazing. If you have a
friend who understands these processes. buy them
dinner and pick their brain, but remember there
aren't many welders who work with parts as small
as we work with daily. It will very seldom be use ful
to fix a mistake by welding a small part and. like it
or not, the best way will usually be starting over.

TlG welding aluminum
When aluminum is TIG welded it must be very
clean. The entire part to be welded has to be cleaned
with an acid bath before welding to insure a good
weld. Because aluminum can dissipate heat so
quickly, large parts have to be preheated. I use an
oxygen/acetylene torch. By turning down the oxygen
the flame will create "soot". This soot will stick to
the part and will be released from the aluminum
surface when the aluminum is the right temperature
to weld. Aluminum never looks hot, and a hot piece
that has just been welded should never be left alone
to cool where someone may inadvertently touch it.
At least put a sign on it. Don ' t cool it with water as
you may anneal or soften the material.

How would you remove this nut which appears to
be thoroughly welded 10 the boll? This/un puzzle
by Larry Lamp was an entry inlhe 1995 Machinist 's
Challenge coniesl in Michigan.

..,""'NII,...

Star Wars welding with lasers and electronic beoms
Exotic fusion welds are now being done with lasers
and electronic beam welding. These can be
microscopic welds that are controlled with the
utmost precision. This type of welding is used by
laboratories and production equipment, and because
of the high cost it nonnally wouldn't be considered
for the home hobbyist.
Taking your skills in these areas to the next level
In closing this section I want to remind you that I'm
not an expert in these fields. I have dabbled with
each process enough to know that I would need a

The solution is obvious once you know how it worb·,
but many :-.peclators look one look al the massive
weld and said il was impossible.

55

Modeling tricks of the trade from Phil Malison
Making a brass ship's prapeller
Most kits come with a cast propeller which you file
to final finish. If you are building a model from
scratch, making a nice looking scale propeller can

be a tough project unless you have a plan. Phil
Mattson has made many of them, and here's how
he does it.
I. A hub is turned on the lathe and left on the end of

its piece of stock. The chuck is put onto the indexing
attachment (or a rotary table) and held on the mill.
The headstock is offset to the angle of the desired

pitch for your blades and a slot is cut for each blade.
2. Four blade profiles are cut from sheet brass and

filed to shape. The photo shows the hub and the
four flat blades along with a finished prop.

3. Each blade is placed on a block of hard rubber
and a brass billet of the proper diameter is laid on
top of it. The billet is hit with a hammer (protect it
with a piece of wood) and the proper curve is bent
into the blade. The photo shows a flat blade on the
rubber sheet and a finished blade on top of the billet.

4. The hub is placed on the shaft and blades are

)
,

6C~CQ

soldered into each of the slots. As a final touch, the
prop is polished to a mirror finish.

1

56

SECTION I-General Machining

(hapter 5- Using hand tools and abrasives
The Nicholson® file company started
manufacturing files in 1864 and produces files that
have become the standard for the world. Today
(1998) you can still purchase an 8" mill file, smooth,
for $6.12. There are cheaper files, but I believe a
good file is worth the extra money and is really a
bargain when you consider what can be
accomplished with one. Files give a machined part
its final shape and finish. Too often I see parts that
have been accurately made to size, but lack that
special appearance that a good craftsman can add.
The "final touch" is usually accomplished with a
simple file, a good set of hands and a good mind
controlling the process. When machining parts for
pleasure, you are in a sense a sculptor, and your
medium is metal. Parts should do more than just
work. They should have the detail to make them
look perfect even if they are scrutinized under
magnification. Try as we may to eliminate the
craftsman with fancy CNC machines, it is still a
craftsman's touch that produces "beautiful" parts.
You can't expect the average person to appreciate
this extra effort, but your peers will.

MACHINIST'S FLAT BASTARD FILE

HAND FILE

PILLAR FILE
SQUARE FILE
ROUND FILE

THREE SQUARE FILE

HALF·ROUND FILE

KNIFE FILE

Files come in all sorls (?f shapes and sizes. Each
has a parlieular purpose and havinK a Kood
assortment on hand can make your I{fe a /01 easier.

I am going to stay within the bounds of using files

on small metal parts. The material being filed must
be hard enough to be successfully filed. Soft
materials like wood should be sanded.

File shapes
Files come in all sizes and shapes. Round, flat,
triangular, square and half round are just a few of
the standard shapes. These shapes and sizes can be
ordered through mail order industrial suppliers. We
have several listed on our web site that have
hundreds of styles listed, and it is up to the craftsman
to find the right tool to do the job. One point worth
noting is that files can be ordered with blank or
"safe" edges. This is very helpful when filing up to
a shoulder. Swiss pattern needle files are sold in sets
that have been manufactured throughout the world
and have become one of the real bargains for the
home machinist. A good needle file set is a " must".

SINGLE·CUT FILE

DDUBLE·CUT FILE

Riffle.
There is another type offile that not too many people
know about. They are called "riffles" or "rifflers".
They are great to add detail to parts that have nonstandard shapes. Riffles were developed for tool
makers to put the final touches on complex shapes.

CURVED·CUT FILE

The grooves in Jiles can be cut at a number of
different angles. For the purposes of miniature
machining. a single-cut miff fife wiff be the most
useful [oo/.
57

be at an angle that allows the teeth to cut the part al
an angle. If the teeth hit an edge squarely they havc
a tendency to chatter. Remember, a file has a built
in angled cutting edge.
Keep your files clean and sharp
Files should be replaced when they get dull. The
sharpness of files should be judged by their
performance. When files start cutting on their ends
better than in the middle they are worn and it is time
to replace them. A file should cut with little
"downforce". To cut properly they need to be clean.
The grooves on the backside of the cutting edges
are the same as the flutes in a drill or mill cutter. A
drill wouldn't be expected to work with its flutes
clogged and a file will not work properly unless it is
frequently cleaned. I use a small wire brush that has
the shape of a toothbrush.
Precautions when working on spinning parts
A file used on a lathe can be very dangerous. If the
point of the file comes in contact with the three-jaw
chuck, it will be driven backwards into your hand.
These can be nasty injuries and can only be avoided
by concentrating on the job at hand. Machining is a
process that requires hands to be in close proximity
of moving cutters and spindles. When operating
manual machines, the only safety device that really
works is the brain keeping the hands out of trouble.
PuHing handles on files
For safety, all files should have handles on them
when they are used, but it is especially important
when lathe-filing. By the way, the proper way to
seat a file in a handle is to bang the handle end down
on the workbench, using the file's momentum to
seat it into the handle. Never hold the handle end up
and hit the metal file end on the workbench.

Rifflers are usedforJiling theJinishing touches onto
complex shapes. There are many choices of shape
to choose from.
The files have many cross sections and have a file
on each end of the handle that have been "bent" to
get into tight places. When you get working at this
level of detail, engraving would better describe the
work you are performing.
GG;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;:;;;;;;;;'mIunDlmilhi!ml!l!ililillIn!lDIII9bIllIHOI!!U",- - "

V
---~

"~. . . . . . . . . . .t1~,*~@itilmall+ssmSlBmt!m.......
I~

~n~;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;c;a_--1ii!I
NeedleJiles are also goodfor wor/ring in small areas
and come in a large selection ofcross sections and
shapes. Files are amazingly inexpensive considering
the work involved in making them.
Powered rotary files
I'm sure everyone has seen kits that have a high
speed motor to drive a wide assortment rotary tools.
Dremel is by far the largest manufacturer of these
neat little sets. They can be real handy but don't use
them in a small cavity. If they dig in, they bounce to
the opposite side and you can destroy a part in a
split second. It is really worth the extra effort to
machine good finishes in cavities. They are very
difficult to clean up later.

Magnifying eyewear makes miniature work easier
I strongly recommend a magnifying headset for
doing work like this. It is wise to use the minimum
amount of magnification that can be used to get the
desired results. Powerful lenses distort your
surroundings so much they hurt more than they help.
They must be comfortable to wear. Magnifying
glasses are inexpensive and should also be
considered a necessary tool for fine finishing.
Deburring the edges and corners of a block
If the edges on a small rectangular block need
debuning, the amount of comer break should be
equal on all edges. This is when your eyes become
more accurate than you thought they were. You can

Working with files
A single-cut, flat mill file is my personal favorite.
These files have ridges in only one direction rather
than two directions. This doesn't allow them to
remove material quite as fast, but when you are
working with small parts, time isn't as important as
quality. Mill files have straight teeth angled to the
body. This creates a self-cleaning action. For general
work such as deburring, I use a 6" to 8" long file
with a smooth cut.
When a file first comes in contact with a part, it
should be allowed to find its resting point before
any pressure is applied. This keeps the edges from
digging in. The direction the file is driven should
58

The photo above shows blocks in various stages offinish . The unfinished block all the left has square,
machined corners and a drilled hole. Its fly-cut surface shows machining marks. The block in the middle
has been lightly sanded in two directions with 320 grit sandpaper on a flat surface and has had the corners
slightly softened with a flat mill file. The hole has been chamfered with a chamfering tool. In addition to
surface sanding, the right block has had the edges beveled wilh a mill file and then sanded. The corners
have been slightly rounded off. The hole has been chamfered and lightly spot-faced with a coullterbore.
easily distinguish a difference of only .005"
(.127mm). Ifappearance is important on this block
I will go one more step to put the final touches on
exposed corners. The chamfered edges now have
the appearance of three separate edges joining. They
would look better if these surfaces flowed together.
After the edges have been equally chamfered, use
your file with light pressure and file around the
corner. This will round off the comer on one side.
Sides two and three are done the same way. The
final comer will have a beautiful shape that can be
polished to perfection. This should only be done to
comers that do not mate with another part.

Polishing stones
If you have a nice, flat, machined surface that shows
a few tool marks, it will not be improved by filing.
I switch to abrasives. Inexpensive "polishing stones"
that come in a variety of shapes, sizes and grits are

Removing tool marks and final finishing
The part is now complete, or is it? It has been milled
to shape and carefully deburred, but it doesn't have
the look you want. You remember the parts you saw
which were built by one of the masters of our hobby.
They looked more like pieces of jewelry than
mechanical parts. If this is what you want, the part
still needs a lot more work. The next step is removing
tool marks. Nothing looks worst to me than a surface
that has been polished too soon. The shiny surface
will magnify the flaws.

A selection of small polishing stones. Keep them
clean by frequently dipping them in kerosene a.\· yo II
work. Work/rom rougher to finer grits to achieve
the finish you need.
59

These "sticks" will work well for most metals, but
may be to slow to remove deep gouges in the harder
materials. The 320A paper is the only type I would
recommend. Coarser papers don't cut as well. I
believe a metal surface is just too hard for them,
and the maximum pressure that can be applied
doesn't allow them to work. On the other hand, finer
grits like 400 or 600 cut so slowly they can be a
waste of time. If you want a better finish than you
can get with 320A. polish it.
320A wet and dry paper is also useful to finish flat
surfaces. Larger surfaces must be very flat or it will
be easy for you to notice variations. The full size
sheet of paper is laid on a flat surface and soaked
with kerosene. The part is then dragged across the
paper with little down pressure. This helps keep the
part square to the flat surface. I always use a surface
plate. Again, I have found I get better results by
taking straight cuts from a variety of angles.

The photos in the background show the actual deck
fittings from a vintage Chris Craft boat. In the
foreground is a model part that duplicates the highly
polished sheen of the chrome on the original bow
light. The model is by M. H. Ellett.
""""&lL1Um
available. These aren't things that are sold at your
local hardware stores and a mail order company
would be your best source. I have found a 1/4" square
shape the most useful. The end can be shaped on a
bench grinder to get into tight spaces. The stone is
dipped into kerosene frequently to keep the surface
being cut awash with fluid. I've found that by
changing the direction of cut as much as possible
on each pass across the surface, the process will be
speeded up. You make as many passes as it takes to
get rid of all tool marks. Do not try to do large
surfaces at one time. This is a very slow process
and the average person will get very sloppy if they
try to take on too big an area. The next step is to use
a finer grit stone and remove the scratches left by
the previous stone. This process is repeated until
you have a finish that is flat and free from all but
microscopic scratches. The next process is polishing
the surface.

Powdered and liquid abrasive polishes
Most any abrasive powder can work, but diamond
powder is by far the best and also the most
expensive. Most any abrasive type polish will work
as well. Automobile rubbing compounds will work
and they should also be applied with a stick. The
diamonds come mixed with an oil. A small amount
is put on a clean stick and the stick is used like a
polishing stone. The diamonds become imbedded
in the stick and will keep cutting as long as a very
small amount of kerosene is used. Of course, the
diamonds will be eventually be worn and washed

Sandpapers
I have gotten excellent results with 320A wet and
dry sandpaper glued to small sticks. I buy these
wooden sticks at hobby shops and prefer spruce. I
glue the sticks to the paper with instant "super glue"
and make up a batch of them at one time. The glue
hardens immediately and the sandpaper can be
trimmed to the stick size. This glue works well
because it doesn't seem to break down with the
kerosene that must be used to maintain a cutting
action. Many times this is all that is needed to finish
a part to your satisfaction. Highly polished parts
don ' t always look good because the finish will
exaggerate any flaws.

A commercial "tumbler" uses abrasive particles to
remove rough edges /rom machined parts.
60

away and more diamond compound will have to be
added. You have to be careful you do not
contaminate the sticks with any grit and the part has
to be meticulously clean. You wouldn ' t polish a new
Ferrari without washing it first. One little piece of
coarse grit can make a polished surface look as
though it had been attacked by a graffiti vandal.

Sandbla,ted and beadbla,ted fini,he,
Sandblasting or beadblasting puts a soft, dull fini sh
on metals. If you are modeling a part where yo u
need to use machining but you want the finished
part to look like a casting, sand- or beadbl asting the
part can give you the fini sh you are looking for. It 's
a pretty "low tech" process. All you nced is a
compressor, a sandblasting "gun", a hopper and a
bag of si lica sand, but unless you plan to do a lot of
it the mess it generates just isn 't worth doing it
yourself. It' s not very expensive to send your parts
out for sandblastin g and is probab ly worth it not to
have to deal with the very abrasive si li ca du st.
However, taking a few small parts to a professional
sandblaster is usually not practical. Their equipment
is too large, and they are not reall y not set up to
handle small parts. An automotive sand blaster that
has an enclosed box for sandblasting small parts is
probabl y your best bet.

Tumbled finishes
Production parts will be finished in a machine called
a "tumbler". The parts are put into the drum of the
tumbler along with a quantit y of an abrasive
medium , which comes in a variety o f different
shapes and sizes. When the machine is turned on,
the random abrasion between part and abra sive
medium will rub the tool marks off. For the home
use, a small rotary tumbler used by the jewelry trade
may be helpful and costs less than industrial
model s. It isn' t a fast process, but the onl y lahor is
mixing the parts with the media and then adding
water with a very small amount of detergent. The
media should outweigh the parts by three times to
kee p the parts from damaging one another by
contact. The dete rge nt keeps th e media from
getting slippery from oil which would stop the
cutting action. It will usually take several hours to
get the desired results.

If you do try and do it yourself, be sure to wear the
proper eye protection and th e correct type of
respirator mask. The fine particles of sili ca are the
same as what makes up glass, and getting them in
your lungs can cause silicosis, which is simil ar to
asbestosis.

IIIOl"' .... Ewn

Here 's what M.H. Ellett 's Chris Craft runabout looks like finished and in the water. The detailed and
highly polishedfittings make this model look like the real thing no matter how close you gel.
61

I

Jerry Kieffer is seen here at a model exhibition with his J/12 scale Brown & Sharpe Universal Milling
Machine. He superdetailed his model based on photos in a reproduction ofa Charles A. Strelinger & Co.
machine" tool catalogJrom 1895. Jerry is in the process ofoutfitting a complete J/12 scale overhead belt

driven machine shop as it might have been found in the late 1800 'so As is typical ofJerry's models. every
detail is represented to exact scale. Shown below is the dividing head which sits on the mill's table.

Jerry 's fingers give a sense a/scale [0 the small size of the dividing head. The indexing plate has the
correct pattern of 119 holes, each only .008" in diameter.

62

SECTION I- General Machining

Chapter 6- CuHing tools for metalworking
6.1- GENERAL NOTES ON CUniNG TOOLS

li g ht c u ts. Too l or pa rt de fl ectio n has lO be
considered in every case. Whether you are operating
a machine the size of a locomoti ve or as small as a
S her lin e, the pro bl e m s re ma in t he sa me, bu t
fortun ately, the costs don't. A large part can have
thousands of do ll ars worth of material and labor
in vested before a mac hini st touches it. How woul d
you like to be the empl oyee that has to tell his boss
he had j ust bo red a ho le overs ize in a twe nty ·
thousand dollar forg ing?

Tool Deflection
In machining, the cutting tools are the interfaces
between the machine and the part. Thi s is where
the part is cut and shaped. Machines are built which
are capable of incredibly accurate movements, but
these acc urate moves can ' ( help the process if the
cutter is deflecting by large amounts. A 1/2" ( 13mm)
end mill can defl ect as mu ch as .050" ( 1.2S mm).
The deflection is a functi on of the diameter of the
tool compared to its length , plus the sharpness of
the too l, the feed rate and the depth o f cut all have
to be considered. You must understand th is fact to
success full y make mac hin ed parts. It is not a
bu sin ess o f just numbe red move me nt s. It is a
process that requires a great deal o f tho ught and
pl ann ing to produce good parts. The better you get
at anticipating these basic probl ems, the better you
will become at machining metals.

The ho me mac hini st wi ll have to learn these facts
by tri al and e rro r. T hey d o n' t us uall y have the
advantage of hav in g a skill ed machini st nearby to
re ly o n fo r informatio n. I' ll never understand why
someone re lati ve ly new to the trade will resent a
skilled craftsman s uggest ing a better met hod of
do ing the job. Information is being passed on that
could be of tremendous help to them. I imagine they
have never spen t days of their ow n time tryin g to
solve a prob le m th at co uld have been solved in
minutes by a skilled craftsman. The best and fastest
way to teach yourself is by constantly checking the
part as it is bei ng machined. Learn how much the
machine and tools deflect as they are being used.

Overcoming Problems on a Lathe
Lathes are easier to deal with than mill s because the
o pe rati ons are straig htfo rward. T hey a re two
dimensional mac hines, and di ameters are easy to
meas ure. The probl e ms enco unte red with lath es
usuall y involve the part bending. A perfectly aligned
lathe will not cut absolutely straight unless the part
is rigid eno ugh to support itse lf. The shape of the
cutting tool will influence the amount of defl ection.
A s ha rp po inte d too l, w ith t he c uttin g ed ge
perpendicul ar to the diameter being machined, will
have less defl ectio n force than a tool with a large
radius. Large radius lathe tools can be a loser if you
are working on parts that are small or on a worn out
machine because the forces are directed away from
the headstock and towards the part . Thi s can bend
the part or load worn out slides. On a Sherline lathe
a max imum too l radiu s shouldn ' t exceed .0 15". O n
high speed steel lathe tools, I will grind a small fl at
on the point rather than a radius to improve the finish.
You can't grind the small radii requi red free hand,
but you can grind a fl at on a be nch grinder which

long, thin piece of stock will deflect away from
the cutting tool. Overcoming the shortfalls of a
process or the quirks of a particular machin e to
make consistently good parts is what separates a
hacker from a craftsman.

A

A mac hini st will use eve ry ava il ab le skill to
overcome these obstacles by "sneaking up" to fin al
dimensio ns to make the fir st part good. If more
identical parts are to be made, ways can then be
found to speed up the process. Co mmo n se nse
should tell you that if a cutter deflects a large amount
on heavy cuts, it will still defl ect a small amount on
63

will work almost as well. Hand ground lathe tools
are described completely in the section on "grinding
your own tools" later in this chapter. They can be
not only the fastest method of removing metal, but
also the cheapest.

Debris is created as the EDM operates. This will
"short out" the cutting action so the part must be
flushed with oil to wash away the debris even though
it is submerged in oil. Much of the skill in operating
these machines is how you accomplish this. It is
much more difficult than it sounds. I use an EDM
machine to build plastic molds because the electrode
is many times easier to shape than the cavity. Molds
are built with materials which can be hard to
machine.

Electrical discharge machining or "EDM"
There is another way of cutting metal with which
many home machinists are not familiar. I want you
to know about this process, because I'm sure you
may be curious about how a modem machine shop
deals with hardened materials. It is called "Electrical
Discharge Machining" or EDM. This is a slow
process that does the seemingly impossible by using
an electrode to remove metaL The electrode is made
to the opposite shape you want to produce. (For
example, a square electrode will produce a square
hole.) When the electrode gets within .001" of the
work, small sparks jump across the gap. The
temperature ofthese sparks is hotter than the surface
of the sun, and the metal actually disintegrates. In a
sense, this happens one molecule at a time, which is
why it is a slow process. It also takes place
submerged in a special oil. The electrode, which is
usually a pure form of graphite, has been shaped to
bum a pocket into the hardened steel. The electrode
also disintegrates during the process. EDM machines
have controls that can be set to cut faster at the
expense of the electrode; therefore, several identical
electrodes are usually used to produce each shape.
Each succeeding electrode makes the cut more and
more accurate.

Other special uses for EDM
A simple form of EDM machine has been
developed just to remove broken taps from parts.
The electrode is simply a tube that has a diameter
which is less than the inside diameter of the hole in
which the tap has broken off. Electrolyte is pumped
down the tube and the simple EDM burns the
center of the tap away. The broken tap can then be
"picked out" and, if done correctly, the hole will
not be damaged by the sparks. There is also a highly
sophisticated EDM that cuts with a small diameter
wire which is fed through the part like a bandsaw.
They are used to make cutting tools like punches
and dies and are amazingly accurate but very
expensive-around $100,000. EDM machines have
changed the way parts are designed and built. Many
businesses have been started that take advantage of
the capabilities of these machines which are
expensive and have a limited use. I've even seen
several designs for "homemade" EDM machines
that will work as long as great deal of detail isn't .
required.

EDM, CNC, CAD/CAM and other acronym.
of the compuler age
Today. EDM electrodes are made on CNC mills
which are controlled by computer programs that take
information directly from the drawing that has also
been produced on a computer. This type of work is
where the term CAD/CAM (computer aided design!

computer aided manufacturing) came from. These
can be exciting times for the machinist who learns
the new rules that govern this new way of doing
things.

"The toughest decision a purchasing agent
fiu:es is when he is aboul [0 buy the machine
deSigned to replace him . ..

An EDM removes metal by actually vaporizing it
with a high powered electrical discharge or spark.
It is capable ofgreat accuracy and ofmaking shapes
that would be impossible with other methods.

- Dr. Laurence J. Peter

64

6.2- CUTTING TOOLS FOR BOTH

THE LATHE AND MILL
Using Center Drills

A center drill (top) and a spotting drill (bottom).

Center drills have been designed to drill a ho le that
a tail stock center will use to support the part. They
have a short straight section at the end of a sixtydegree cutting edge. As the chart shows, numerous
sizes are avai lab le to take care of any job. However,
they do have a few problems you should be aware
of. The straight section doesn't have any clearance
on the sides like a dri ll . Without cutting oil the chips
clog up the nutes and they can twist off. The reason
they don't have clearance is to make them "find"
the eentc'r of bar stock in a lathe. Drills that are
flexib le can start drilling off center without the help
of a center drill to get them started. Even with
cutt ing oil you can't dri ll to the required depth
without backing out the center dri ll completely and
adding cutting oil to it's tip. The straight part of the
hole was to make a pocket to keep lubricants for
lubricating the supporting sixty-degree tailstock
dead center. A great deal of heat from friction can
be generated at the center without proper lubrication.
White lead was the preferred lubricant of its day
because it didn 't gall, but for obvious health reasons
it isn 't avai lable any more. On lathes we now use
live centers which rotate with the part to eliminate
friction.

and started making "spotting drill s" for use in our
own shop. We could save minutes of machine time
on one part by not using center drills. They have
fina lly brought to the market drill s of thi s type called
"spotting dri ll s". When compared to the co mplex ity
of a standard dril l. spotting drills cost more than they
shou ld , for they could be manufactured cheaper than
a cen ter drill.

A ce,ller drill being IIsed to find tile center ofa piece
of stock. The 60 0 angle will/ocate tile point of the
tai/stock center for tllming between centers. The
0ir
smaller 1I0le will serve as a resen1 for lubricant
if a live center is not to be used.

COMMONLY AVAIlABLE CENTER DRill SIZES
SIZE

000
00
0
1
2
3

BODY
DIA.
1/8"
1/8
1/8
3/l6
3/l6
1/4

DRill
DIA.
.020"
.025
.031
.046
.078
.1 09

DRill
LENGTH
3/64"
1/16
1/16
3/64
5/64
7/64

LENGTH
OVERALL
1-1/4"
1-l/4
1-l/4
1-l/4
1-7/8
2

A drill press can be the most dangerous machine in
a mach ine shop. They are so simple to use that
operators don ' t give them the respect they deserve.
New employees are often given drill press jobs to
start their machining career. Never hold a part by
hand when drilling into metal or simil ar types of
material s. The drill can grab the part and start it
spinni ng at the RPM the machine was set at. The
greatest chance of thi s happening is when a hole is
en larged with a larger dri ll. The softer the material,
the better the chance of thi s happening. The first
part of thi s scenario is the where the drill sc rews
into the part. lift ing it off the table. When the drill
jams in the part. the parI will spin. If thi s happen s.
step away and try to safe ly shut down the sp indle.
Whatever you do, don ' t be a hero and try to grab
the part. You could end up looking like you have

The difference between a Center Drill
and a Spotting Drill
Center drills are an important tool in mach ining and
are used as much on a mi ll as a lathe. It is a simple
fact of life that drills wi ll "wa lk" when start ing a
hole that hasn' t been started with a short , rigid drill.
Center dril ls were the only tool s ava ilable that cou ld
start holes without wandering. The on ly problem
was, it took too long to dril l a pocket for the lubricant
that wasn't needed. Years ago. I saw this problem

65

just been through a war in the 16th century. Also,
when drills are broken off they may leave a very
sharp point in either the spindle or the part that could
cut to a depth that could result in permanent injury.
Clamp your parts down firmly and cut down on
injuries.

There is a series of drills called "screw machine
drills" that are shorter and better suited for small
machines. They make them in both left and right
hand. Only right hand drills will work on a Sherline
because of the direction of rotation. Use high speed
steel drills because of their low cost and long life
when properly used. Stay away from carbide drills
unless you have a particular need for them. They
are very brittle and most small tools can't produce
the spindle speeds needed for carbide to have an
advantage. Printed circuit drilling machines, for
example, may run carbide drills at over 60,000 RPM.

Who came up with these stupid drill sizes anyway?
Manufacturers of cutting tools sometimes have a
strange way of applying logic. Take the standard
drill indexes that are available today. They are still
the same as sets from fifty years ago. Ifanyone could
explain the logic of the sizes they manufacture I
would love to know. They simply keep making the
same old sizes they have always made without
questioning the logic. Overseas manufactures aren't
any better for they just copy what is available.
(Obviously this is one of my pet peeves.) The quality
of the better drills manufactured today is superb,
but it is too bad they don't make them in the proper
sizes. The better industrial suppliers may offer high
and slow helix (flute twist), but I would recommend
that you stick with the standard '~obber" drills. They
are cheaper and work quite well. The hobbyist!
machinist will want to buy a drill set for working
with the miniature machine tools. My first choice
would be a number I to 60 set. (Sizes .040" to .228".)
This set will have the drills you need for drilling
and tapping small holes. A miniature tool doesn't
have the power or the size for large drills. On smaller
machines, larger holes are bored rather than drilled.

Using drill bits properly
Drills get more abuse than any other metal cutting
tool made. Watching a home repair expert stick a
drill back in a hole that they just drilled with a slight
error and try to make the hole oblong by bending
the drill should give a machinist the horrors. To
begin with, the flutes on a drill were never designed
to cut, but somehow they do when enough pressure
is applied. They are designed to pull the chips out
of the hole and a small amount of coolant is a must,
especially for holes going more than two drill
diameters deep. If you want accurately drilled holes,
you can't abuse drills. Small diameter drills are
usually discarded when dull to maintain accuracy.
Hand-sharpened drills will normally drill oversize
because the cutting lips are not exactly equal. To
keep drills sharp, they have to be turned at a speed
that is forty percent or less of the material cutting
speed they are drilling. Exceeding this speed can
instantly destroy the cutting edge. Dulling tools in
this manner is foolish because speed is one of the
easiest variables to control. Think about the way
American Indians would start the campfire. They
would tum a straight, dry stick back and forth with
the palms of their hands until friction generated
enough heat to start a fire on the wood where the
stick point was rubbing. Now consider how fast they
could have started that fire ifthey powered that stick
with a five horsepower motor! Hopefully I have
made my point.
With the centering hole drilled and the RPM set
correctly it is time to drill the hole to size. The
Sherline motor doesn't have the horsepower for large
diameters and high feed rates, but that isn't a
problem as long as you work within the capabilities
of your tools. It just takes a little longer. The real
problem is keeping a constant feed rate and knowing
how deep the drill can go without "pulling" the drill.

The metal box holds a set of drill bits sized from
number 1 through 60. The red plastic box holds a
selection of very small bits from number 61 through
80. III the foreground are #1, #60 and #80 sizes.
66

The drill point must be lubricated and the chips must
be removed from the drill flutes. With automatic
production machinery, the drill can go as much as
three and a halftimes the drill diameter into the hole
before it is backed out to clear the chips. From that
point on, I usuall y program depth of cut in one drill
diameter increments. Using manual machines I
would recommend two times the drill diameter for
the first cut and one diameter beyond that point.
When using small drills, the amount that can be
drilled without clearing the drill is as small as the
drill diameter. This is very important and the
reason I am emphasizing it. A drill that has been
broken off in a part will usually result in "scrap".
To make matters worse, when you start over again,
unless you have a spare bit, the one you need is now
broken. Good drilling technique makes this one
problem that is avoidable.

that is being drilled. The cause can be a dull drill or
not using a sufficient feed rate to keep the drill
cutting. This will work harden the surface, which
will dull the drill , which will work harden the surface
even more until the drill will not cut at all. To work
around thi s problem, the spindl e has to be turning
slow enough to have a feed rate that allows the drill
tip to maintain a constant, uninterrupted cut. The
calculated spindle speed may be much faster, but
the machinist can't keep up with the higher RPM.
Also, don ' t leave the dril~at the bottom of a hole
when it isn' t cutting. Raise it immediately. I f a hole
gets work hardened, check the drill for sharpness
and start drilling again with a slight " tap". This will
sometimes allow the drill point to break through the
hardened surface and start drilling again.

ANote on very large drill bits
Drill bits at the large end of the size scale usua ll y
have a tapered shank and could never be used on a
Sherlin e. for th ey are as big as the machine.
However, there is still something to be learned fro m
large diameter drills. In many cases, larger drills
have a tapered shank with a "tang". A tang is a
rectangular shape on the small end of the taper that
engages with a holder designed to accept it so the
drill cannot spin. The added cost for manufacturing
this type of drill is worth every penny if it keeps the
drill from spinning, as thi s will ruin the shank. The
way standard twist drills are kept from spinning is
by tightening the drill chuck with a key to create
enough fri ction to lock them in place.- If they are
not ti ghtened enough, they will spin in the chuck,
and you si mpl y can't tighten the chuck enough by
hand without a key. Many machinists never learn
this fact and the results of their carelessness can be
found in tool cribs around the world.

Should a hole be drilled in stepped sizes
or directly to size?
have found that once the part is center drilled,
drilling a hole to size with a single drill will give
better results than enlarging a smaller hole with a
series of larger drills. Every time a different tool
enters a part it can pick up off center, because the
drill before it may have left a sharp burred edge in
the hole. If thi s method must be used, make sure the
spotting or center drill will cut to a diameter that
includes all the sizes you will be using and has a
ninety or sixty degree tip. Brass is a difficult material
in which to enlarge a drilled hole. In fact, it can be
downright dangerous, because a standard drill can
be pulled into a pre-drilled hol e and lock up .
Machinists often put a slight flat on the cutting lip
of drills used to enlarge a hole in brass to avoid thi s
problem.
Drilling stainless steel
First-time machinists will discover it' s a whole new
ball game the first time they attempt to drill a hole
in a piece of stainless steel. It is called "work
hardening" and it is just as the name implies. I' m
sure everyone has taken a wire and bent it back and
forth until it broke. What was done was the metal
kept getting harder at the bend until it became so
brittle it fractured. Stainless steel as well as many
other exotic metals can surface harden while being
machined. Small drills will make this fact even more
apparent. If a drill is allowed to rub the surface
without cutting. it will work harden the surface it is
trying to drill. This happens at the bottom of a hole

A large drill bit with a tapered shank. On larger
machine tools where cUfling forces are higher the
flat tang keeps the drill bit from spinning in the
chuck. Miniature machine tools don 't have enough
power to require this kind ofholding force, but you
still need to tighten your chuck with a key so the
drill can't be ruined by :o.pinning in the chuck.
Additional infonnation on large drills is not included
because it isn' t very useful for small machines like
the Sherline. Machinery's Handbook will be the best
source of infonnation for large drills. I have also
67

learned much information from catalogs on cutting
tool s printed by mail order suppliers. I would also
suggest you inspect a small drill under a magnifying
glass some time to appreciate the level of perfection
to which these tools have been made. Their very
reasonable cost will be appreciated even more once
you get a really close look.

Top: a 1/4" short shank counterbore ofhigh speed
steel. Above: a longer style counterbore is weJJ
suited for screw heads and spring pockets. There
are many more styles and shapes.

Counteninks

A pilot sized to the drilled hole goes in the front oj
each counterbore. They are normally sold separately
and are held in place with a set screw.

The countersinks I prefer to use have only one
cutting lip, and they will cause you very few
problems with chatter. Countersinking tools are used
to chamfer the sharp edge left after a hole has been
drilled. A wide variety of angles are available. They
are also used to allow flat-headed screws to fit flush
with the part surface. They should be run at a very
low rpm when used in manual machines. You can
instantly destroy these tools in stainless steel by
using excessive speed with a hand drill. If the hand
drill you are working with doesn't have a speed
control , keep the RPM low by pulsing the trigger
switch. The speed should be such that you can see
the tool cutting. If the tool is not perpendicular to
the hole, the chamfer will be uneven.

flat surface is another common use. If the pilot is
the right size it keeps the tool from wandering.
Counterbores will usually have three flutes and a
very slow helix, making their diameters difficult to
measure. They have to be turned at low RPM with a
moderate amount of pressure similar to using a
countersink. They are expensive.

Raaman
Reamers are available in more sizes than drills. A
reamed hole will have more accurate diameters and
better finishes than a drilled hole. However, if they
are not used properly, a good drilled hole may be
better than a reamed hole. They come with straight
and spiral flutes. In theory, straight flutes will work
better if the hole goes all the way through the part
because a lot of chips get in front of the cutting edge.
Spiral flutes will help pull the chips from the
bottom ofa "blind" hole. A right-hand cut, left-hand
spiral will push the chips forward and should never
be used in a blind hole. I always order straight flutes
for general use. A feed rate of .001" per tooth is
recommended, so the RPM must be slow enough to
maintain this feed. Ample cutting oil must be
applied, and the reamer must be pulled out of the
hole often so chips can't build up in the flutes. The
reamer must be located directly over the center of
the hole to work properly.

Stop drill.
Step drills have one or more diameters and are made
to eliminate changing tools to save time in
machining operations. Only consider the step drill's
smallest diameter for feeds and its largest diameter
for speeds. It is easy to twist the tip off if not enough
cutting oil is used. They are expensive, and because
of the limited sizes available will usually be custommade by local toolmakers. Only use them when the
cost is justified by the time saved.

Countarboras
Counterbores are used to enlarge existing holes.
They have a "pilot" shaft which can be changed to
different sizes on larger diameters counterbores. One
of the most common uses for these tools today would
be counterboring a clearance screw hole for a socket
head cap screw. (Many times these screws are
referred to as "Allen cap screws".) Spot facing rough
or curved castings so bolts can be pulled down on a

The safest way is to ream the hole to size
immediately after drilling. I usually allow less than
.008" (.2mm) on sizes less thac 5/16" (8mm) acd
for over this diameter I allow 1164" (.4mm) for
68

clean-up with a reamer. A reamer can start cutting
off-cen ter if the drilled hole has chips lying on the
hole ed ge; in fact o n CNC machine s, we
occasionally put a program stop to allow the operator
time to blow the chips out with an air hose. What
happens is the chip wi ll start rotating wit h th e
reamer, sh utting down the cutting action on one side.
The reamer will cut oversize unti l the chip is forced
fro m its location. It wi ll then start cutting on-size
leav ing the hole wi th a "bell -mouthed" en trance.
Fractional inch sizes are quite a bit cheaper than
dec imal size reamers. Try to design yo ur parts to
have fini sh diameters that take advantage of thi s fact.

-

..

"" "

avail able. The sav ings in cost will be wo rth the
effort. Remember also that just because the size may
be li sted doesn ' t mean yo u can buy it at every
industria l supplier, never mind a local hardware
store. Buy taps before you start the job, and it would
be wise to buy an extra one. They are very easy to
break. If possible, I get my tapping done early on
complex parts. If a tap does break and ru ins the part,
you are not scrappin g a lot of labor. If yo u are
hav ing a problems tapping holes, the first question
to be asked is about the quality of the taps you are
using. Inex pensive tap sets can be so bad they
wouldn ' t cut butter. They usuall y are found in
department stores. Stay away from them no matter
how tempting they may look. Tap sets so ld by
indu strial suppli ers are better, but I still advise
buying onl y what you need, when you need it. Buy
quality taps and save hours of grief.

......... ",

Taps
Taps are cutting tools to cut screw threads in holes
(see thread cuning instructions for thread definitions)
and are made in many sizes and shapes. Taps cut
several thread shapes and the sixty-degree thread is
standard. The "acme" and "square" threads are not
available in diameters under one half inch and will
very seldom be used by the hobbyist. For the type
of work done in miniature machining, I would not
consi der large taps. If needed, you can usually get
the information from mo st indu st rial suppl y
catalogs.

Taps are made in a variety of styles, and my favorit e
are the "spiral po int gun taps". In sma ll er sizes they
have two flutes and are the strongest series of taps
avai lable. "Spiral pointed" means that the chip is
pushed ahead of the tap. Thi s eliminates the need to
back up a tap to break the chip as four-fluted hand
taps require. These taps are made with two choices
for the cutting tip: "plug" and "bottoming". Use thc
plug style for general use. Spiral point taps have
been designed to push the chips out the bottom of
the hole that is being tapped. In blind holes, the chips
will pil e up at th e bottom and co uld cause a
problem.

The same rules should be applied to large and small
taps. Taps are defined by their diameter first, which
may be a wire gauge size, and followed by the
number of threads per inch. Metric taps will be
defined by diameter and actual pitch. Drill and tap
charts will give the infonnation to cut 75% of a full
thread. Engineers have discovered long ago that a
full thread isn't necessary. A 75% thread is almost
as strong and the difficulty in cutting a full thread
just isn't worth the extra effort and cost.

--

-

.':!_"'-

---

•

SPiRAl POINT TAP

-.. .. . . .

..

'~"\

. '

SPIRAL FWTE TAP

Spiral pointed tops vs. spiral fluted tops
Don 't confuse spiral pointed taps with spiral fluted
taps. Spiral fluted taps pull the chips out of the hole,
which may seem like an excellent idea until the
strength of the tap is considered. They break easily,
because under load they "unwind" and jam in the
hole. The problem eliminated by these taps can be
canceled out by their inherent weakness. Ifpossible.
drill the hole deeper than it wi ll be threaded to make
room for these chips. After tapping, the chips can
be removed from the hole with tweezers.

To tap a high quality thread, you need to start with a
proper hole size and use a lubricating cutting fluid.
A chamfered hole will start the tap better and wi ll
not raise the surface where the hole is being tapped;
howeve r, thin parts may requ ire no chamfer in
order to have the maximum number of threads for a
given thickness.

Why (heap taps are a poor investment
If you have a cho ice as to the size you can use, look
at a tool catalog and pick out a size that is readil y
69

A problem can arise when a tap is reversed. The
chips can jam the tip in a blind hole, breaking the
tap, but tap breakage is less with two-fluted than
with four-fluted " hand taps" because of the extra
strength of these fine cutting tools. In small sizes,
the four-fluted hand taps should be avoided but some
sizes are only available in that form. "Starting" taps
have a shallow cutting angle that will cover many
threads. Each cutting tooth will form a small amount
of the thread. While this may seem like a good idea,
it does not always work well. With many threads
cutting at the same time, the torque required to drive
them may be higher than a plug style spiral pointed
gun tap, but they do start the tap straight down the
hole with less effort.
Tapered pipe thread taps and dies
Pipes used in plumbing use a National Pipe Thread
(NPT) standard which is a tapered thread. Tightening
the parts together seals them as the tapers meet,
making a tight joint. When tapping a hole for a
tapered thread, measure the part you will be
threading into it to make sure you don' t run the tap
too deep. NPT threads start at 1/16 -27 and go up to
over 3 inches. You might use some of the smallest
sizes on miniature plumbing fittings for steam
engine models or pipe fittings in small engine blocks.

Tapping stainless steel
Hand tapping a small diameter screw thread of75%
may seem impossible if the material is stainless steel.
The tip of the tool will twisi to the point of almost
breaking before the tap will even start to cut. Dull
or poor quality taps will not stand a chance in
stainless. A 65% thread may help, but a change such
as this must be authorized if the part isn' t for your
own use, and. considered if it is for your own use.
Don ' t use a tap until it breaks. They are disposable
tools and have a life-span that can be short with
exotic materials.
Tap wrenches
The tap wrenches for holding taps used by amateurs
will usually be the standard hand tap holder. Buy
the size that just goes to one-quarter inch and, if
you can locate a smaller size, buy it too. It will be
useful to have a very small tap wrench for the small
sizes that you will encounter while working on very
small parts. When you work with equipment that is
too big for the job, you lose that "feel" that keeps
taps from breaking. A tap wrench has a chuck similar
to a drill chuck but it has only two jaws. The jaws
allow the tap to be held by the square, machined
end on the tap. Good quality tap wrenches will clamp
the tap in line with the tap wrench body, making it
easier to get the tap square with the part. When
working with full size mills. I will use the spindle
to line the tap over the hole. Some tap wrenches
have a sliding shaft protruding from the handle.
Using this shaft, the holder can then be held in a
collet or drill chuck and be supported so that the
holder is always square and directly over the hole.
To cut successfully. taps must start square while
cutting the first threads.

Hand tapping a hole
When tapping holes by hand, the tap must be
perpendicular to the hole. I recommend having the
part clamped down so the tap will be pointed
towards the center of the earth. It is easier to line up
when the tap and handle are square to its
surroundings. The quickest way to break a tap is
casually holding the part in your hand and a tap in
the other. If the tap is not "square" it will not follow
the hole and will progressively start to cut one side
more than the other. This will quickly reach the point
of no return when the cut exceeds the strength of
the tap. It is very difficult to straighten a tapped hole.
Again, you must use a cutting fluid. It not only keeps
chips from sticking to the cutting edge, it also keeps
the tap from sticking to the cut thread. Remember
that "like" materials will gall and stick together, and
this is one reason taps break at a alanning rate.

A standard "T" handle lap wrench and a lap wrench
with api/ot shaftfor holding in a collet or drill chuck.

Tapping threads on big CNC machines
Automatic tapping on a modern CNC milling
machine is accomplished by reversing the spindle.
The tap is held in rigid holders and the spindle is
electronically synchronized with the feed to tum in
relation to pitch of the tap. It does this so accurately,

NOTE: Broken taps can be dangerous! Pieces of
the tap can be thrown at a very high speed and
easily do eye damage. Always wear eye protection.
The broken tap can leave a sharp cutting edge where
it has broken and give a nasty, deep cut that could
require stitches.
70

a "floating" holder is not necessary. It is amazing to
see a part being tapped at 2000 rpm! Metal wi ll cut
better at a higher rpm and the quality of the tapped
holes will be better. Of course, you can't do this on
inexpensive equipment, but I thought you might find
it interesting.

tap into the part and in the opposite direction to
unscrew the tap when the tapping head is raised.
The tapping head is usually geared to tum the tap at
twice the input rpm when backing the tap out of the
work. This makes the process more efficient. They
make several models, and for small taps I prefer a
cone clutch design over the dog clutch. Dog clutches
engage with a "snap" which has a tendency to break
small taps. Also, they cannot tap left-handed threads.
Cone clutches operate more smoothly.
When a tapping head is used, the operator must put
enough pressure on it to start the threading process.
The tap will then be screwed into the hole at the
rate of its pitch. If the feed rate, controlled by the
operator, does not equal the pitch of the tap, the
clutch will disengage. On a dril1 press, the depth of
the tapped hole will be control1ed by the "depth
control stop". When you are tapping blind holes,
you set the stop to make sure the tap will not go all
the way to the bottom. Measure the distance to go
and reset the stop to eliminate any error. A tap will
go deeper than the stop is set because it has to
disengage the clutch. When the tap is unscrewed, a
slight withdrawal pressure is needed to operate the
opposite clutch and any excess pressure will "tear"
the thread as the tap leaves the now-threaded hole.
A definite feel for the process is needed to operate
these labor saving devices effectively.

Tapping heads for manual mills and drill presses
What you may be able to afford some day is a small
tapping head. They can be used with manual drill
presses and mills. A good quality tapping head costs
about $400 (1998). They are designed to tum in one
•
direction when the pressure is applied to drive the

Tricks of the trade...A tapping tip tram Bob Shores
I have read many tips on tapping holes-some
good, some not. Five years ago I dreamed up a
tapping method for small holes. I tap a lot of
holes with 0-80 and 2-56 threads, and since I
have been using this method, I have not broken
a tap in five years.

the flutes. The end of the tap is gripped in the
drill chuck and lowered until it just touches the
work. The chuck is then loosened to allow the
tap to tum freely. The disk holding the tap is
turned with your thumb and forefinger. The drill
chuck a~ts as a guide to keep the tap ruMing true,
and your fingers are very sensitive to the amount
oftorque being applied. To break a tap you would
have to apply a lot of force.

After drilling the hole in your part to the proper
size, the drill bit is removed from the chuck
without disturbing the work. A 2" aluminum
disk, knurled on the outside and drilled and
tapped for a 4-40 hex bolt grips the tap just above

- Bob Shores
DIlllOtUCK

H." SUGlmYlIAlO" --7"~
1IWnA'
2- KHUWO ALUMINUM DISK

2- DIA.xIW KHURl£D
AlUMINUM OISII

1+- - - '"
4-40 xl- HEX lat.'

71

6.3--- LATHE (unING TOOLS
Right· and leh·hand tool ,hupe,
Again, the difference between a lathe and a mill is
that the work turns on a lathe and the tool turns on a
mill. Before we get into grinding lathe tools let's
define this type of cutting tool as a single point tool
that is fixed (doesn't cut by rotating) and held in a
tool block on the crosslide of a lathe. By the way,
lathe tools can be cut as "right-hand" or "left-hand"
shapes. The reason we call a tool a "right-handed"
tool when the cutting edge is on the left is because
it is designated by which way the chip leaves the
cutting tool. A left-handed tool is designated as such
because the chip will go to the left as it cuts. The
cutting edge will be on the right. The standard tool
is a right-hand tool, and a right-hand ground tool
bit is included with each Sherline lathe to help get a
novice started. Scissors or sheet metal shears are
also defined this way, because the cutoff falls to the
left or right. Right-handed people will usually prefer
"left-hand" shears.
CHUCK

A selection of 114" high speed steel and carbide
tipped cutting toolsfor miniature machi1ling. Shown
are left to right: A high speed steel boring tool. rightand left-hand cutting tools. right- and left-hand
carbide tools and a carbide 60° threading tool.

High speed steel tools
For the average machinist, "high speed steel" will
always have a use in a machine shop. It is
inexpensive and easy to grind and shape. High speed
steels comes in a variety of grades. For the average
work done in a home shop, M-2 tool steel is more
than adequate. M-5 would be considered top-of-theline. Some tool steels contain several other metals
to add to their life. Cobalt is a common additive
that makes the cutting edge less prone to "chipping"
and is effective in adding life to a tool. Usually, the
more high speed tool steel costs, the harder it will
be to grind and the longer it will hold an edge. You
will find the answers to all engineering problems
are a trade-off, just as this one is.

TAILSTOCK

Brozed carbide and diamond tipped tools
LEFT·HANO TOOL

Sherline offers brazed carbide tools in left. right,
and 60° threading. Brazed carbide tools have a
shorter life than inserted tip carbide tools because
the carbide has been brazed to the holder and their
different expansion rates can causes problems. The
left-hand brazed carbide tool works well with the
flycutter and is included with its purchase. They can
be useful but you need a diamond wheel to resharpen
them. One thing you must realize is that some
materials can only be cut with carbide. You don't
have a choice. These materials usually have an
abrasive nature and are not that "hard". In general,
hard materials (heat treated tool steels) can't be
successfully machined. You can't chuck up an end
mill in a lathe and machine its shank down with
carbide or diamond cutting tools. Diamond cutting
tools are used to get beautiful finishes on nonferrous
materials and shouldn't be used on steels. The
carbon in the diamond will weld to the carbon in
the steel and destroy the diamond.

RlGHT·HANO TOOL

A tool is called a "left-hand tool" because the chip
comes off to the left even though the cutting face is
on the right. On a right-hand tool the chip comes
off to the right.

Why you should avoid cheap carbon sl861 tools
The Sherline lathe has been designed to use 114"
square tool bits. You don't have many choices when
it comes to grinding your own lathe tools. The shapes
you will need to produce special parts can't be made
with standard cutting tools. If you read an old book
on machining, it may have mentioned carbon steel
tools, and these are case hardened tools. The only
way you might find these inferior tools would be in
cheap imported sets. Today, the labor and machine
cost to produce a good cutting tool exceeds the
material cost by so much that it just doesn't make
sense to use cheap steels.
72

Heat treated tool steels are shaped by grinding, not
by turning. Cutting the silver and copper material
used in the armature of an electric motor would be a
good application for a diamond tipped tool.

up the RPM. Insert tools don't need cutting oils to
work well, but I st ill use a few drops now and then.
The lack of messy cutting oil can be an important
factor when working on your kitchen table, as it
keeps the work area cleaner.

Positive and negotive rake lools
I experimented with various tools before making a
choice. I wanted a cutting tool that had a positive
rake. I don't believe the tools we manufacture are
rigid enough for the normal negative rake tools
which cost less and are far more popular. * These
tools are designed for machines that weigh hundreds
of times more than a Sheri inc Lathe. Positive rake
tools have to be sharpened at the time of manufacture
which adds to their cost, but also adds to their
performance on a Sherline lathe. You can' t use any
in se rt in these hold ers unless it has a positive
cutting edge.
*NOTE: Sherline also offers a negative rake tool
holder designed especially for use on the Sherline
lathe which allows the use of a 55° negative rake
tip. Because of the design of the holder, this tool
cuts like a positive rake cutter. This gives you the
best of both worlds. A description of that tool can
be found on the next page.

Sl'lCIAI. TOU DRMR
fOI """'_
IIlsm HOlD DOn

SCREW (JIKUI.ll(D

TOOl

Carbide insert tool and tool post.

Inserted tip carbide tools
I would first like to emphasize that I believe the
prime method for cutting metal on a miniature lathe
should be high speed steel cutting tools. They are
inexpensive, easy to sharpen and can be ground to
make "form" tools. On the other hand, insert tool s
are expensive and can't be resharpened or shaped,
but there are times they can be a lifesaver. In some
applications they are the perfect tool for the job.

G

The obvious difference between brazed carbide tools
and inserted carbide tools is that the tip is held on
with a screw rather than brazed onto a piece of steel.
This fact has a lot to do with the success of insert
tools in recent years. Steel and carbide have slightly
different expansion rates which can cause premature
failure of the carbide tip. It is surprising that a small
sc rew will hold these inserts tight enough to
accurately cut metal , but it does. We run 20
horsepower computer controlled lathes at Sherline
that can remove metal at a rate of2 pounds (I kg.) a
minute with these tools and have few failures.

cunIHGE~'

7)

!!

NEGoUlVE RAKE TIP

POSITIVE RAXE TIP

Negative and Positive Rake Carbide Cutting Tips.
Negative Rake tips can be held upside down giving
4 CUlling edges. Positive Rake tips cutfrom one side
only, but cut better.

Another choice I made was the .015" (4mm) radius
on the tip. A large tool radius can give good
finishes on a full size machine, but it can cause havoc
on small diameter parts or miniature machines.
Large radius tools create high tool loads because of
their large cutting surface. On the other hand , a
radius smaller than .015" will chip too easily.

The reasons I believe insert tools should have a place
in your shop is they are ready to use, they hold their
cutting edge when cutting exotic metals or abrasive
materials and they can speed up the cutting process.

The rules on cufting speeds are differenl
for inserted tip tools
Normal cutting speed rules don' t apply to the same
extent as when using high speed steel. Stainless steel
can be cut at triple the rate with these tools compared
to high speed steel tools. This higher RPM also puts
you in a better horsepower range on a small motor.
Another interesting fact is that you can get a better
finish on some steels, such as cold rolled, by turning

The difference between the 80° and 55° tools is that
the 80° tool is a little stronger at the tip, but the 55°
tool can get into comers better. If you plan to only
purchase one, buy the 55°. The 80° tool is a good
choice to use for rough cuts.
Reading the thips

To get maximum life out of these tools be sure to
increase the "feed" as you increase the RPM. The
73

chip should have a tight curl to it and break off into
short lengths. These chips can be very HOT.
Remember, your hands are closer to the cutting edge
when using miniature machine tools, 50 use
caution.

the insert. If you break a chip out of one surface, I
don't recommend that you use the cutting surface
on the other side. The insert would not be properly
supported on the tool holder with material missing
from the lower surface which should be resting
solidly on the tool holder. Damage to the tool holder
can occur if you use a broken insert in this fashion.

(uHing harder surfaces
Another plus for insert tools is their ability to cut
hard or abrasive materials. Don't plan on machining
hardened tool steel with them, but you can cut
through a work-hardened surface on stainless steel
with ease.

Precautions for making deep (uts
Keep in mind also that it is not good machining
practice to feed a tool straight into a part any further
than necessary. Parting-off tools are designed for
this task, but regular cutting tools are not. Going
straight in puts two cutting surfaces to work at once,
and as you get deeper and deeper into the part, you
can overload the cutting capacity of the machine
and cause it to jam. If you must feed straight in to
cut a groove, for example, go a short distance and
then open up the slot side to side, using only one
cutting surface of the tool at a time. Then go a little
deeper and repeat the side to side cuts.

Carbide tools can simplify many machining
operations, but will never solve problems caused
by poor machining practices. As with all machining
operations, WEAR EYE PROTECfION.

Don't be afraid to crank up the RPM 0 bit
An advantage of thi s tool is that it will cut in either
direction. It can also give good finishes on hard-tomachine materials such as cold rolled steel. (Note:
the best finishes on soft materials such as aluminum,
brass or leaded steels will still be achieved using a
good, sharp high s peed steel tool. However the
carbide insert tool will still do a very good job and
will last almost forever on these materials.) A good
finish on harder materials using a carbide tool is
accomplished by turning up the RPM of the spindle
about three times faster than if you were using a
high speed steel tool. In fact, when making most
cuts with this tool , don't be afraid to turn up the
RPM and feed the tool rapidly. Of course, you must
have the part you are machining held in a setup
sufficiently secure to accomplish this.

The negative rake tool holder is shown with a box
of !>pare carbide tips and the tightening wrench. The
insert is angled down slightly which provides
clearance and is supported all the way down to the
table, which provides support for stiffness.

The 3/8" Ie 55° negative rake tool holder
I believe Sherline's 3/8" IC 55 0 negative rake
indexable holder will bring a lot of enjoyment to
your machining, particularly if you have trouble
grinding good tools or if you choose to tum difficult
materials such as stainless steel. The indexable
carbide insert sits on the tool holder at a 50 negative
angle. This gives the sides of the cutter clearance
even though the insert has square sides. By having
square sides, both the top and bottom of the insert
can be used as cutting edges. This gives you front
and back, top and bottom of both sides for a total of
four cutting edges on each insert. Though not
inexpensive, when you consider you are getting four
cutting tools in one, it is really a pretty good deal.

Design of the negative rake tool holder
The holder is manufactured from 7075 Aluminum,
which is approximately twice as hard as regular
aluminum in a T6 condition. This material also costs
approximately twice as much, but r felt it would he
money well spent to insure a long life for the holder.

Design of the insert (uHer
The carbide insert is designed in such a way that it
cuts like a positive rake cutter. Positive rake cutters
don ' t require as much rigidity as negative rake
cutters. This type of design allows the advantages
of a negative rake cutter (four cutting edges per

Remember that carbide cutting tools are a little more
brittle than high speed steel and take care not to break
74

in se rt) without requiring the rigidity that can ' t be
found in bcnch type machines.

If£IGIIT « TOOl TIP5HOW). SET
TO M A am:a. Of PAIl
T

Replacement inserts for this holder are available both
from Sherline and from a number of tool manufacturers . They are usually designated DNMG- 33 1.

NOTE, ALWAYS USE CUTTING OIL WHEN USING THE CUTOFF TOOL

A parting tool is IIsed to separafe (f completed part
from its raw material workpiece.

The cUloH or "parting" 1001
After completing a part in the lathe it is frequent ly
necessary to se parate the part from the excess
material used for chucking. This operation is best
accomplished with the use of a cutoff tool or "parting
tool" as it is sometimes called. The Sherline cutoff
too l and holder consists of a very slender high speed
too l steel cutting blade mounted in a special tool
holder. The thinness of the blade (.040") enables it
to feed into the part quite easil y and at the same
time minimi zes the amount of waste material. One
word of caution; never use a parting tool on a part
mounted between centers. The part may bind on
the cutter and result in a scrapped part or a broken
cutting tool.

If the tool chatters, first che~k to sce if the work is
being held properly. Then decrease speed (R PM ) or
increase feed rate or bot h. Once th e blade has
chattered, it leaves a serrated fin ish which causes
more chatter. Somet imes a serrated fini sh can be
elimi nated by stopping the spindle, adding a liberal
amount of cutting oil , bringing the blade up so there
is a slight pressure on it without the spindl e turning,
and then turning by hand o r as slowly as possible
with the speed control.
Very small work may be completely cut off when
held in a chuck and allowed to fall onto thc crosslidc.
It is too small and li ght to cause any damage. Ho llow
articles such as rings may be caught on a piece of
wi re whose end is held in a suitable position.

The proper way to cui oH a port
Always try to lay work out so the cutoff tool is used
as close to the spindle as possible. Set blade height
by sliding the blade in its slot in the tool holder. It
sho uld be set so the tip is at the same heic ht as the
centerline of the part being cut. An unusual part
diameter may require a shim to be placed under the
front or rear of the holder to accompli sh this.

SHARPENING INSTRUCTIONS
To sharpen the blade, use the too l support on the
grinder set in such a way that it will produce a T to
10° angle on the blade (top to bolto m). (See Figure
I below.)

NOTE: AL WAYS USE CUTTING OIL WH EN
USING THE CUTOFF TOOL.The cut will be made
much smoother, easier and cooler.

FIGURE J-Side view
a/blade.

The turning speed for parting should be
approximately one half the normal turning speed
for any given material , and the feed rate should be a
little heavy so the chip wi ll not break up in the slot.
If speed and feed are correct, there will not be any
chatter, and the chip will come out as ifit were being
unro Bed. Coo lant (cutting oi l) plays a major roll in
thi s occurring properl y.

SIDE VIEW

1' 1010' : ' ;

FIGURE 2- Top view
of blade (enl arged)
when gro und for
''parting off'
75

t

~=i=-'l

s:---\

TOP VIEW

A

v

If you are sharpening the blade to "part off', the
blade should have an additional angle of
approximately 5° when viewed from the top with
the point on the right. (See Figure 2.) Normally the
angle would be as high as 15° but the .040" thickness
of the blade would not be rigid enough and the blade
could bend. If you want to cut grooves, don't put
any angle on the blade when seen from the top.

be flipped over in the holder. The mounting block
raises the tool holder the amount needed to put the
tip of the tool back at the right cutting height. This
will save you time by being able to leave the cutoff
tool holder mounted to the table while you use the
regular tool post in its normal position on the front
side of the part.
The mounting block is placed between the standard
cutofftool holder (PIN 3002) and the lathe crosslide.
It is mounted on the back side of the part, or the
side away from the crosslide handwheel. The longer
10-32 x 1-3/4" socket head screw provided with the
rear mounting block is used to attach the unit to the
crosslide table. (Use the T-nut that came with the
cutoff tool holder.) Note that the hole in the
mounting block is not in the center. Rotate the block
to find the position where the sides line up with the
sides of the cutoff tool holder.

If the cutting edges on the sides get dull, grind off
the end of the blade until you get into new material
where the edges are sharp to the cutting end. New
blades are available as PIN 3086 from Sherline.

o

Loosen the two clamping screws which hold the
cutoff tool blade in place. Tum the blade over so
the cutting tip is facing down and mount it as shown
in Figure 3. Adjust the tip of the tool to the desired
height by sliding it back and forth in its slot. Lock it
in position with the two clamping screws.

Mounting the (utoff tool using a rear mounting block
The rear mounting block is a simple spacer block
that allows you to mount the cutoff tool and holder
to the table on the back side of the part. Because the
part is rotating "up" on the back side, the tool must
lISE LONGER 10-321 1·3/4'
SOCKET HEAD S<Rew
PROVIDED

Even though the tool is upside down, all the same
rules about its use still apply. The only difference is
that the crosslide table is now cranked toward the
operator to cut off a part.

P 3002 CUTOff lOOtAND HOLDER
IN
ST.l.NOARD
lOOLPOST AND
CUTTING TOOL

CROSSUDE

FIGURE 3-Seen looking from headstock toward
tai/stock. (Arrow shows direction ofpart rotation.)
The rear mounting block is shown in position under
the cutoff tool holder and mounted to the "back"
side of crosslide table. The cutoff tool holder can
now be left mounted to the table, ready for a parting
operation at any time. There is no need to remove
the standard tool post in order to "part off" the
work.

A parting tool is held upside down in the tool holder
which is mounted to the rear mounting block. This
simple accessory is helpful ifyou are doing repeated
cutoffoperations and don't want to keep switching
toolposts.
76

GRINDING YOUR OWN LATHE TOOLS
•

As a home shop machinist you are going to have to
shape tools the old fashioned way, and that means
you need a grinder. A bench grinder doesn't have to
be expensive to work well, but it does require good
"wheel s" for high speed steels. Try to find a source
for grinding wheels from an industrial supplier.
Some of the wheels that come with inexpensive
grinders wouldn 't sharpen a butter knife. Sixty grit
is a good place to start. A wheel dresser is also a
necessity. They cost less than $10 and are readi ly
available from good hardware slores.

7 _

-f

T

--_

t·
.'

GRINDING WHEEl

C-"' - ,; . . .
-

- - - I.

-::-.r-:- . :.:. '

FIGURE 4- Se!!oo/ res! al allY heighl. hili til 7 0 wigle
from centerline of wheel.

Using a wheel dresser to keep your wheel sharp
Grinding wheels should be considered cutting tools
and have to be sharpened. A wheel dresser sharpens
by "breaking off' the outer layer of abras ive grit
from the wheel with star shaped rotating cutters
which also have to be replaced from time to time.
This leaves the cutting edges of the grit sharp and
clean.

(j

GeHing started on making a tool
Now it 's time to make a tool, and whether you turn the
job into a major project is up to you!

CAUTION!

0)

Wben working around grinders it is an
absolute necessity to wear EYE
PROTECTION. Grinding debris is
thrown out at higb velocities and can
damage not only eyes, but also expensive
glasses. Wear safety glasses or a full face
shield.

A wheel dressing tool and spare "s/ar" cutter

A sharp wheel wi ll cut quickly with a " hissing"
sound and with very little heat by comparison to a
dull wheel. A dull wheel produces a "rapping"
sound created by a "loaded up" area on the cutting
surface. In a way, you can compare what happens
to grinding wheels to a piece of sandpaper that is
being used to sand a painted surface; the paper loads
up, stops cutting, and has to be replaced.

If you ' ve never sharpened a tool , take a close look
at how ours are sharpened. Let 's dup licate the right
hand tool on the opposite end of the blank. Be careful
you don ' t cut yourself on the blank or the sharpened
end wh ile working with it.

SeHing up your grinder and tool rest
For safety, a bench grinder should be mounted to
something heavy enough so it wi ll not move while
being used. The tool support must be used and
should be set at approximately 7°. Few people have
the skill to make tools without a tool support and in
essence it's wasted effort. Tool supports are usually
made up of two pieces that allow you to set your
tool rest above or below center. It really doesn't
matter whether it's above or below as long as the
support is at 7°.

First dress the wheel by taking the dresser and sell ing
it on the tool support square with the wheel and wh ile
applying a light pressure move the dresser back and
forth with the grinder running. Unless the wheel is
in bad shape, it should be ready to use in a few
passes.

Grinding side 1 of the tool
Tum off the grinder and set the tool support for
approximately 70 if you haven ' t done it yet If you ' re
not good at guessing at angles use a presharpened
SHERLINE tool to set the angle. Metal cutting tools
are very tolerant on angles. I' ve always found wood
cutting tools more difficult to sharpen. Too little
angle and the " heel" of the tool will rub, too much
angle will cause the tool to "dig in" and chatter.

The reason tool supports are designed like this is so
they can be used for a variety of uses, not just tool
bits. What this means is that if the tool support is
above or below center, it must be adjusted as the
wheel diameter changes.

77

ClIP

j
---------'-~
C

PART

-----.rL=~TOOL

HEEl

FIG URE 5-Heel of tool
Have a cup of water handy to cool the tool with, set
the blank on the tool rest and start grinding side I.

FIGURE 9- Properly ground 100/ CUlling into a
corner.

+-- GRINDING WHEEL

Grinding side 2 of the tool
The reason angle B is ground less than 90° is to
allow the tool to get into corners.

TOOL REST

Side 2 is ground the same way as side I, moving
the tool back and forth until you have a point. After
you get side 2 ground, cool the tool in the cup of
water.

FIGURE 6- Grinding Side I ofthe tool
1/4'·3/16"

(NOTE: Because of r angle on
1001 rest, side of 1001 is actually
cut lirs!.)

1

Now I want you to learn another aspect of tool
grinding. It is important to know when you have
ground the surface up to the cutting edge, especiall y
when resharpening lathe tools. Take the tool you
just ground and bring it up to the wheel at a sli ghtly
different ang le than you just ground for this
experiment. Watch the point that touches the wheel
first and you will notice that the sparks will bounce
off the cutting edge only where the wheel has ground
from top to bottom.

I

FIGURE 7-Properly
T POF TOOL
O
ground side 1
_~i.:.:....----Move the blank back and forth across the face of
the wheel until you have ground a 10° angle on
approximately 3/ 16" (4mm) of side I .

A

,.
SPARKS

B

This is where the "positive approach" comes in.
Unless you push the tool into the wheel with enough
pressure, the tool w ill bounce around and you' ll
never get a good flat cutting surface. It isn '{

necessary to worry about getting the tool too hot.
Modem day tool steels don't anneal and a little
discoloration doesn't affect the tool life in tool room
use. What you should wony about is not burning
yourself or grinding the tips of your fingers off!
Concentrate on holding the 10° angle while moving
back and forth. We' ll give this edge a final
sharpening later, but now it's time for side 2.

FIGURES IOA- Tip not yet ground flat and lOB,
Tool groundjlal alllhe way 10 Ihe lip.
This tells you when the tool has been sharpened
without taking it away to look which allows you to
grind flat and true surfaces. If you sharpen a tool for
a Sherline lathe, use a 1/4" square tool blank and
keep the cutting edge up to the top of the blank; the
too l will come out on center without shims. You
will have to be precise grinding the third side to
accomplish this.

TOP Of TOOL

Grinding side 3

L THAN 90&
fSS

Now you will use the ski ll you have developed
grinding the second side. Set the blank on the support
with the 10° (side I) up. The tool has to be brought
up to the grinding wheel with a slight angle so you

FIGURE 8- Grinding side 2 of the tool
78

FIGURE J3-Plltting a
.010" "Break" on the
tip of the 1001.

ROTATE TOOL

I

ANGlES APPROX. EQUAL
APPROI. IS·

TOP OF TOOL

GRINO UNTIL Sl'ARKS
JUST REACH TIP OF TOOL

FIGURE II - Grinding the "Hook " into side 3

two angles converge at the point, the angle in relation
to the sides is greater. Think about it!

don't grind the tip below center. With the tool setting
on the rest, move the tool in and grind until you see
sparks bouncing off the cutting edge where the
corner of the wheel is lined up with the back part of
the 10° face. When this happens, slowly decrease
the angle without pushing the tool in any more until
sparks bounce all the way to the tip. Stop as soon as
this happens. You may inspect it, and the surface
should be entirely ground. The recommended way
is to put more "hook" on the tool than I have
suggested, but I have found that the slight increase
in performance is offset by the problems encountered
resharpening these tools.

This means that if you set the tool flat on the tool
rest, the tool rest angle would have to be increased
to get an even flat. Thi s wouldn't be worth the effort,
so the easy way is to freehand it. I always start by
touching the heel of the tool first, and then change
the angle until a slight flat is put on the tip. Of course,
the angle you're holding it at has to be close when
starting to get desired results.

A

~

fRONT

-~ LlI

~

fRONT

r--------u!JI

FIGURES i2A-Normally recommended "hook"
ground into 1001 and 12B, Simpler method suggested
for Sherline tools.

To put the finishing touches on your tool, you have
to "kiss off' sides 1 and 2 again. You must carefull y
line up side 1 with the wheel and bring it to the wheel
in a positive manner with very little pressure. Then
watch for the sparks on the cutting edge. What you're
trying to accomplish is to make the tool set against
the wheel on the same plane as when you first ground
side I. If the tool is held too rigid, it will not align
itself, too loose and it will bounce around.

FiGURE 14- Hand holding the 100110 "Break" the
point saves resetting the angle on the tool rest.

The purpose of this flat is to improve finish and tool
life. I don ' t recommend a large radius on the tip of
tools used on small machines. These machines are
not rigid enough to get the desired results from this
practice and cause "chatter" problems.

"Breaking" the point

Some final lips

Use the same method on side 2. The tool should be
ready to use except for the point. I always put about
a .0 10" (.2mm) "break" on the point by holding the
tool with the point aimed at the wheel face. Because

The finished product should be a right handed too l,
have flat cutting surfaces (except for the radius
caused by the wheel), have a slight flat on the tip,
and a tip angle ofless than 90°. Tools used on lathes
79

SKAPE OF PART DESIRED

such as the Sherline will do all their cutting at the
tip of th e tool because they don't have the
horsepower for 1/4" (6mm) cuts.
I don't recommend using oil stones to improve the
edges. After a few minutes use with an occasional
dab of cutting oil a properly sharpened tool will hone
itself in.

STEP I

STEfl

B
FORM TOOL

I always believe the final sharpening to a tool should
take place with the wheel cutting the cutting edge
of the tool from the top of the tool to the bottom
when using bench grinders.

Drawing A shows a Typical Form Tool made by a
custom toolmaking shop. Drawing B shows a home
shop method of achieving the same finished shape
in two steps with a tool that can be ground on a
bench grinder.

I realize I've given a great deal of information on
how to do what I call a "simple operation", but these
are very difficult instructions to write because I'm
trying to tell you how to control your hands, not a
si mplc machinc.

good mind driving them! We can use the grinding
wheel comers on our $50 grinder and generate the
shape one half at a time on each side of the tool and
still get our job done.

'" ,

n

l

,

Form tool s don ' t need any top relief(hook) to work.
Use low spindle RPM and steady feed rates to
prevent chatter. The width of a fonn tool should
never exceed three times the smallest diameter of
the finished part.

SIDE VIEW

BOTIOIIYIEW

Like any skill , tool grinding is one that has to
develop with time. It is also the skill that allows
you to go one step beyond the average " hacker".
Working with sharp tools makes machining much
more pleasant too, so this is a skill worth spending
some time developing. In the long run you will also
save a lot of money by not having to continually
buy new cutting tools or pay someone to sharpen
them for you.

A Iypical boring 100/

Grinding boring tools
Boring tool s are the most difficult tools to grind.
They should always be made as rigid as possible.
Tool angles around the "tip" can be the same as any
cutting tool, but clearances of the tool body have to
be considered carefully. A tool ground with enough
clearance for a finished hole may not have enough
clearance to start with when the hole has a smaller
diameter. If you have to bore a hole in a part that
has a lot of work in it, have a tool ready to use that's
been checked out on a piece of scrap.
Grinding "form" tools
Form tool s are used to create a shape that is a mirror
image of the shape of the tool. To grind form tools,
a pattern of the finished shape should be at hand
and you should have a workable design for the tool
in mind. You must be able to achieve the shape you
want with the tools ·you have to work with. For
example, you can't grind a 1/8" (3mm) groove 1/4"
(6mm) deep into your tool with a 1/2" (12mm) wide
grinding wheel.
Intricate form tools are usually made by tool and
cutter specialists who have expensive shop rates and
use precision grinders, diamond dressers and the
large variety of wheels available to them. However,
all is not lost if we have a good pair of hands with a

Sparksflyas thefinishing touches are put on a lathe
tool using a grinding wheel. Learning to grind good
cutting tools is a key to getting goodfinishes on your
parts.
80

spindle. Thi s second cut happens because the ins ide
CUlling edge remains sharp longer and the machine
isn' t " loaded" as much. When fly cutlers are cutting
correctl y, a small spi ral chip will be thrown from
the part. A fly cutler is a very useful tool that can
remove metal quickl y, sav ing time and elimi nating
the use of costly end mills.

6.4- (umRS FOR MILLING

Fly ,"He"
A fly cutter is a inexpensive way to machine flat
surfaces. All machining operations should be done
using eye protection and it is an absolute must for
fly cutting. As the term implies, the chips "fly". The

Inserted lip fly cuNer

chips can be very hot and care should be taken to

For those who prefer the advantages of working with
inserted carbide tip too ls. Sherline offers an inserted
tip fly cutter. It uses rep laceable carbide cutt in g
inserts which last longer than stee l tool s without
sharpening, plu s they provide an excellent fini sh on
hard · to-machine material s like cold rolled and
sta inless steels. The cutter shape allows it to cut a
straight shoulder on a part, somet hing not possib le
with a standard fly culler. It co me s w ith the
toolholder. a drawbolt, a 2-edged insert, a Torx TIS driver and mounting screws. Additional in serts
are available.

protect yourself. In a sense these are dangerous tools
that can send an improperly clamped part flying.
The cutting portion of the tool is a left-hand lathe
tool which is inexpensive and easily sharpened.
Sherline supplies a left-hand carbide lathe tool with
a new fly cutter, but you can also use high speed
steel and achieve excellent results. Even with a small
milling machine such as the Sherline, the width of

the cut can exceed two inches. They produce a good
finish similar to a lathe and only need a small amount
of coolant to keep the material from sticking to the
cutter. The depth of cut is somewhat limited, and if
the cutter makes a "rapping" sound, lighter cuts
should be taken. They work best when the tool starts
the cut from one side and exits the part on the
opposite side rather than being lowered into the
surface. This eliminates the "crushing" action it takes
to start a cut when the cutter comes in from the top
rather than the side of the part.

-

If a fly cutter is lowered directly into a Ilat surface.
a circle would be cut at the edge but not in the
middle. You have to understand that fly cullers do
not cut to center. The work must be moved under
the spi ndle to cut a flat surface. As you move the
part under the·spindle, the cutter will start cutting
on the outside, and the ins ide of the c utter will start
cutting after the work has been moved under the
spindle equal to the diameter the fly cutter is set at.
Of course, the milling machine spindle must be
square with the table for a fly cutter to work properl y,
but machinists are often tricked into believing their
spindle isn't square when the cutler takes a second
cut on the "bac k" si de as the part is fed under the

2-fWTE, SINGLE ENDED

4-FWU, SINGLE ENDED

~"

UUIn, DOUBLE ENDED

SOllie commoll types of end mills. The flat 011 the
side is where the set Krew is to be tightened to hold
them ill place when /Ising all end mill holder.

End mills
End mill s are used to shape metal parts on a milling
machine . The first thing you should realize about
end mills is they can cut the " meat" off your hands
fa ster than they cut metal. They are sharp! They are
not just flat ended drills. Unlike drills which cut only
at the tip, the sides of the flutes on an end mill have
a cutting edge as well. Don ' t ever touch a turning
end mill! The nex t thing to consider is that e nd mills
can bend or "deflect" while cutting. and the direction
of the bend will be determined by the direction of
the cut. The term s, "conventional milling" and
"climb milling" mu st be thoroughly understood
before doing any mill work.
More detail on end mills can be found on page 201
in the instructions for milling. Also included there
is a chart showing recommended cutting speeds for
various diameter cutters in typical material s.

Regular fly cutter and inserted tip fly cutter
81

--

......:~

~"

........... '

A ball end mill has a round end and will put a radius
in the corners of your cuts.

Mill collet set

Special shaped milling (utters
Milling cutlers that cut angles and shapes are
available. Ball end mill s are a good example of one
type of shaped cutting tools. Ball end mills require
very light cuts because they have a greater cutter
contact area. This causes even more cutter
deflection. Cuts should be taken that are so light
that the feed rate doesn't have a great effect on the
cutter deflection.

collet, the drawbolt must be loosened a few turns
and given a few light taps with a hammer.

Boring head and boring fools
The main purpose of the boring head is to eliminate
the need for a large inventory of drills and reamers.
A small milling machine would not have the power
or rigidity to tum a one-inch diameter drill even if
one could be obtained that would fit. However, holes
of even larger diameters can be accurately bored to
size with a little patience and care.

This section has been one of the most difficult of all
the instructions I have ever written over the years.
What I have tried to accomplish was to make you
aware of problems that don't always have good
solutions. I didn't want to scare a potential home
machinist away by attempting to explain all of the
intricacies of machining, however, I also want a
novice to spend little time fixing mistakes. Many of
the mi stakes I made as I taught myself to be a
machinist could have been avoided if someone had
just told me some of the simple things about cutting
tools that I have passed on to you.

u

CUTIING TOOL HOLDERS FOR MILLING
Sherline's boring head and (l boring tool. Th e
hallam half of the boring head is offset to achieve
the size hole you need.
Boring heads work on the same cutting principle as
lathe boring, except that the cutting tool turns while
the work remains stationary. (When boring on the
lathe, the work turns and the cutter remains
stationary.) The boring head is designed to employ
cutting tools with a 3/8" shank. Sherline offers two
boring tools with lengths appropriate for the Sherline
mill. It is sometimes advisable to remove excessive
tool shank length from standard (non-Sherline)
3/8" boring tools in order to improve rigidity. (See
page 198 for a drawing ofa boring tool in use.)

End mill holders
Sller/ine '5 3/SU End mill holder. Holders like this
are also available in other sizes.
The 3/8" end mill holder makes it easy to use the
popular (and less expensive) 3/8" end mills. Using
double-ended end mills is economical and easy with
this holder as tools are changed by simply loosening
a set screw and changing the tool. The holder is also
available in 3/ 16" and 1/4" sizes to hold smaller size
tools in the same manner.

Tool sizes are listed indicating the smallest diameter
hole that can be bored and the maximum depth that
can be cut. For best results. use the largest diameter
possible with the shortest lengths. A .010" cut
represents a good starting point.

Milling collets
The main purpose of the mill collet set is to hold
end mill s. The spindle nose has an internal Morse
No. I taper, which closes the collet as the drawbolt
is tightened. Morse tapers are approximately 5/8"
per foot and are se lf-loc king. Therefore, to loosen a

Ifboring a hole where a flat bottom is required, it is
advisable to stop the down feed at about .002" above
82

the desired depth, turn off the motor and cut the
remaining distance by hand turning the spindle to
eliminate any possibility of chatter.

may decide to climb mill by choice. Lets go back to
the ditch and try to understand the forces in more
detail again. When conventional milling, we started
with the shovel in the bottom of the trench and
pushed as the shovel was lifted to remove dirt from
the ditch. The lifting action also has to be considered.
The first part of the cutting action is gett ing the
shovel (cutter) to start the cutting action by taking a
cut that gets progressively heavier. At the end of
the cut, the cut is the greatest, which in turn , adds
weight to the person using the shovel, which makes
them sink deeper into the dirt at the bottom of the
trench . This is just the opposite of climb milling
where the lightest (depth) part of the cut is at the
end. (Note that the same forces must be considered
whether the cutter is vertical or horizontal. The
forces involved arc so much greater than gravity that
it is not a consideration.)
Despite its drawbacks, climb milling
can give a beHer finish
Climb milling can create a better finish in two ways.
First, the lightest part of the cut is at the end of the
cut. Second, the chips are tossed from the cutting
area and do not affect the finish. Climb milling will
deflect the cutter away from the cut. It is called elimb
milling because the end mill wants to climb up on
the work. The major problem with machining in this
direction is that the cutter may actually do just thatelimb up on the part and break. Also, when a climb
cut is first started the work has to be pushed into the
cutter. Then the cutting action pulls the backlash
out of the table leadscrew and a heavier cut is taken
than planned. Look at the diagram in the previous
column as it will be very useful in helping you to
understand the interaction between cutter and part.

USING MILLING CUnERS

(ONVINTIONAl MILLING

(LIMB MILLING

Conventional miJJing vs. climb milling. For purposes
of explaination, imagine the part is fixed and the
cutter is moving.

Comparing "Conventional" and "Climb" milling
To explain the difference. the best analogy I can
come up with would be using a shovel to dig a ditch.
Consider the shovel a cutter and yourself the spindle,
and you are digging a ditch that has already been
started. If you dig the shovel in at the bottom of the
ditch and push the shovel away and lift, the force
will push you back and down. This action is the same
as conventional milling. When you start the shovel
at the top of the ditch and pull it towards yourself
and down, you will be pulled towards the shovel
and upward. Consider this action the same as climb
milling. Now consider how a powered ditch digger
works. They have a series of small buckets (cutters)
that are attached to a round frame in a fashicn similar
to a "Ferris wheel". When the cutters are lowered
into the ground, the forces push the machine
backwards and these forces are counteracted by the
tires. The feed of the machine down the ditch will
never exceed the traction of these tires and the
machine is doing "conventional milling". If the ditch
digger were designed to have its cutters tum in the
opposite direction, the cutters would climb up on
the surface, pull the machine forward and the
operator would be chasing the machine around the
field. This represents the basic problem with climb
milling. It can be downright dangerous with
machines that have loose slides or excessive
backlash because it pulls the work into the cutters.

An example of a climb milling cut
As an example, we will consider using an end mill
to cut a 1/ 16" (.062" or I.5mm) wide slot 1/8" deep
(.125" or 3mm) in a piece of aluminum. A novice
might attempt to cut the slot to its final depth in one
pass. The end mill would break even if the depth of
the cut were halved. Next you try a .010" (.2Smm)
cut and lower the cutter into the part .010" at the
start of each pass. This is still a heavy cut but chips
are coming out and you continue on. When the cut
is finally completed you measure it and find the slot
is .070" (1.8mm) wide. It also has a finish that
resembles a stone wal!. Cuts that deflect end mills,
big or small, have these problems and you must deal
with them. The shorter the end mill, the more rigid

Then why would you do it? Sometimes the part
configuration forces cuts in this direction , or you
83

the cutting surface will be. Short end mills can
eliminate some problems and speed up the process,
but the basic problem will always be there.

load changes considerably and the cutter may
"chatter" and cut oversize. A drill will chatter only
at the bOllom of a hole and is supported by the
outside diameter, but an end mill is designed to cut
on the sides as well as the end and can really make
a mess ofa good part when this happens. If the slot
is critical, after rough cutting the slot, I will "plunge
cut" (feeding the end mill straight down) each end
before cutting the slot to size. What can cause grief
with this method is when the cutter starts cutting to
its full diameter at the bottom of the hole which
upsets the cutting loads causing the cutter to wobble
and cut the hole or slot oversize. As long as you
anticipate these potential problems, this is a method
that can be used on any inside comer that you want
perfect.

I would start by taking a cut of only .00 I 5" (.04mm)
to start on the slot we are using as an example. It is
more of an engraving process to cut narrow slots
and, when possible, a slitting saw is quicker. The
problem with thin slitting saws is that they don't
always track well because the teeth may be sharper
on one side of the cuttcr than the other. On larger
slots, an undersize end mill may be used to "rough
cut" the slot. The "on size" end mill can then be
used to bring the slot to size, but there is another
problem that occurs at the end of the slot if the slot
doesn't go through the side of the part. When the
cutter reaches the blind end of the slot, the cutting

Ajly culler is a good way to machinejlat surfaces. It gives an excellent surface finish and makes cuts up to
2 inches wide on a Sherline mill, but cutting forces are high so parts must be held very firmly. Watch out
for the chips... they are HOT, and eye protection is a must!
84

SECTION l-General Machining

Chapter 7- Measuring and measurement tools
Measurement throughout history

No one knows who was the first to actually measure
so mething , but at some point in history ,
craftsmanship reached a point where doing things
"by eye" just wasn't good enough any more. For
example, the builders of the pyramids would start
the job out with a gage carved in stone. From this,
each worker would mark his own measuring stick.
The puni shment for having a stick that wasn't
correctly calibrated was death. Common sense tells
me that they quickly arrived at only one stone for a
standard and that the craftsmen were pretty careful
about marking their measuring sticks. It could ruin

your whole day to have to kill your best stone mason

The lools usedfor measuring and checking parts in
a machine shop stand ready for use on a ground
granite surface plate. The paris you make will be
no more accurate than YOllr ability to measure them.

because he got his sticks mixed up. They must have
had a number of jobs going on at the same time,
and I' m sure some enterprising Egyptian did good
business selling calibrated sticks, saving everyone
in the building trades a lot of trouble.

the furrow in that acre was ca lled a furlong. A
journey was measured in ho urs (much as it is on the
L.A. freeway system today), days o r moons.

The modem stick and stone

Things today really haven ' t changed all that much.
We still need standards for measurement and we
keep coming up with ways to divide the "stick" into
smaller and smaller parts. The "stone" is now a gas
that is measured to the atom electronically, whether
you use the inch or the metric system. The "sticks"
of today are the rulers, tapes, scales and electronic
readouts we use daily .

The foot is also a common unit of meas urement,
although deciding whose foot was to be the standard
was a problem that plagued sta ndardi zat ion
throughout the ages. It would vary from place to
place and time to time as each ruler declared hi s
foot to be the standard for all. The earliest preserved
standard for length comes from 2575 s.c. and is
the length of the foot of a statue of Gudea, the
governor of Lagash in Mesopotamia. It was about
10.41 modem inches long (they had smaller feet
back then) and was divided into 16 parts. Later the
Romans subdivided their version of the foot into 12
unciae, hence our inches. A Roman pace was 5 feet,
and 1000 paces made up a Roman mile.

Measurement increments had a human touch

You might find it interesting to note that must of
the dimensions we are familiar with in the inch
system came from parts of the human body. The
inch was once based on the length of the last joint
of the thumb. A yard was the distance from the tip
of the nose to the end of the fingers with the ann
outstretched. (A seamstress meas ures "yards of
cloth" by pulling from nose to fingertips to this day.)
A fathom is two yard s, or the distance from
outstretched fingertip to fingertip. The ancient
Egyptians also used cubits (elbow to fingertips),
digits (one finger width), palms (four digits) and
hands (five digits). The height of a horse's shoulder
is still o ften measured in "hands".

Despite the current movement to standardize the
world on the metric system, my own preference is
the inch system. Here's why. Whcn working in
metal , .001" (one thousandth of an inch) is a
tolerance that can be achieved with cutting tools,
and .000 1" (one ten thousandth of an inch) is a
tolerance that can be achieved by grinding. The
numbers don ' t come out quite so neatly in the metric
system. Imrn equals .03937", .1mm equals .003')"
and .Olmm equals .0004". The tolerance of ±. l mm
(.004") is too coarse for most work, and ±.Olmrn

Time also figured into some early measurements of
distance as in the acre which was the amount of land
a team of oxen could plow in a day. The lel)gth of
85

(.0004") is too fine. Therefore, you end up with
tolerances too tight or too loose because the
draftsman usually calls out a tolerance of ±.01 mm
when it should be ±.025mm. In addition, the basic
unit of distance measure, the meter, is unrelated to
any human increment, unless you are a basketball
player who can stretch his fingert ips out to 39.37
inches from his nose. On the plus side for the
metric system, of course, is the fact that it is based
on units of 10, and many conversions can be done
in your head. In the end it will be interesting to see
if the pure logic of the metric system can finally
erase the human side of measurement in the inch
system.

is a good lesson that skill and technique can
overcome some of the faults of poor measurement
tools, but carelessness or improper technique can
render even the most sophisticated tools useless.

,
,
!
I
I

Then or now, skill with your 10015 is still
a part of ac:c:urale measurement

A large coordinate measuring machine makes
accurate part measurement easier for the factory
that can afford one. Unfortunately their price takes
them out ofthe reach of the home shop machinist.

Egyptian builders had only simp le plumb lines,
wood squares and rulers, but they obviously used
them with great ski ll , because their measurements
were amazingly accurate. The dimensions of the
Great Pyramid of Gizeh, built by thousands of
workers, boasts sides that vary no more than 0.05
percent from the mean length. That means a
deviation of on ly 4.5 inches over a span of755 feet.
Some construction workers of today might find it
hard to duplicate that accuracy. When Sherline's
factory was being built, a laser level was set up in
the middle of the foundation to layout the building.
I noticed a workman accidentally kick one of the
legs of the level and stick it back in place by hand.
Ifl hadn ' t brought it to the attention of the foreman
who releveled the laser sight, our building might
have resembled the leaning tower of Pisa today. This

,

Machine shop measurement today

,
I
e

I
I

A dial caliper and micrometer are probably two of
the home machinist ·s most used measuring tools.
This boxed sef includes a steel scale as well.

86

Until a few years ago, most factory and machine
shop measuring was done with a micrometer, height
gage, squares and surface plates. In the past few
years many new methods to measure your work have
been added that take advantage of the calculating
power of the computer. The most important of these
new measuring systems would be the "coordinate
measuring machine". It is built on a surface plate
and can read all three axes of movement: "X", "Y"
and "Z". What is interesting about them is the
methods used to come up with dimensions. They
have a small probe that very accurately informs the
computer when it touches the part. To read the
diameter of a hole, the probe has to touch three points
in that hole which don' t have to be equally spaced.
The computer wi ll triangulate these points and
produce a diameter within .0001" (.0025mm) and
note where the center of the hole is located on the
part. The part doesn't even have to be located square
with the machine, yet it can be checked accurately.
The programs that run these machines can be as
complicated as the programs that make the part. The
cost of these marvelous machines can be several
hundred thousand dollars, but they are well worth it
to companies that purchase and manufacture
millions of dollars worth of precision machined
parts.

Modern scrap is more costly than ever
This technology allows aerospace cornpanies to
build rnore perfect products, but it has also filled
sa lvage yards across the world with sorne very
expensive scrap parts. The problem in many cases
is that manufacturer of these parts doesn' t have
measuring equiprnent that is as good as the ir
customer's. Who can afford $ 100,000 measuring
tools to measure $10 parts? Contract machine shops
can go broke overnight when they find out an
expensive, high quantity part has been rejected.
When making machined parts for other people you
have to be able to prove your parts are correct.

fo und many mistakes are accurate to a very close
tolerance, but off by a division. When taking a
reading, always read every dimens ion, not just the
dirnen sion you are correcting. A good exam pl e
would be when you are using a lathe and getting
close to the final cut. The diameter you are reading
may need a ve ry close tolcrancc and yo u arc
concentrating on the thousandths of an inch or tenths
of a millimeter located on the barrel of a micrometer.
When you start look ing only at this part of your
mi crometer you could screw up and get the diameter
off by one full turn which would be twenty-five
thousandths (.50101). Mistakes of this magnitude will
usuall y create scrap.

When making parts for yourself, you can fit one part
to another and tighten the tolerances in the process.
This is a very important difference, and if you work
at fitting and matching parts together you become a
modelmaker. Modelmakers develop a special skill
to make and fit parts together so the assembly works
in unison , while the machinist wi ll produce close
tolerance parts that are within the tolerance of the
part drawing. In rnost cases, he doesn't have the
lUxury of test fittin g it to the part it will eventually
be assembled to. When you make parts for other
people the drawing is "king". A machini st shouldn't
have to worry abo ut problerns so meone rnay
encounter assembling parts they manufacture. They
have enough problems making a part within the
to lerances given. Toolmakers are the best at both
skiIJs because they usually make the parts they fit
together. If yo u build and fit parts together you are
closer to a toolmaker than a machini st. Even though
your tabletop machines are small , the processes you
wi ll use in making yo ur parts are the same as any
rnachini st must deal with.

Good meosuremenllools are one
of the pleasures of machining
I enj oy buying rneasuring too ls. Most people treat
these tools with great respect and take pride in them.
A good too lbox full of high quality measuring tools
in your workshop has the same owner' s sense of
sati sfact ion as a china cabinet full of figurines has
for your wife. I don't know if you will convi nce her
of thi s fact, but it 's worth trying. I have always been
a fan of the Starrett cornpany located in Athol,
Massachusetts. Their rneasuring tools have set the
example for the rest ofthe world to follow, and they
are still reasonabl y priced. The truth is that you can
get by with fa r fewer measuring tools than you will
buy. Again, I want yo u to unde rstand that I' m
referring to people working at thi s trade to please
themselves, not to please a custorner.
Measuring tools don't have to be expensive to work
well. Due to the number of imports on the rnarket

Watch those divisions
If you are making parts for your own enjoyment
there is nothing wrong with changing a dimension
here and there to save a part that may be a few
thousandths (. I rum) undersize. Of course, if it affects
the strength or integrity of the assembly, I wou ld
not do it. When building small metal parts they have
yet to come up with a good "putting on tool"* so
you have to get used to the idea of starting over.
You can't work with dimensions all day without
making an occasional error. The only people who
don '{ make mistakes are those who do nothing. I've
·NQTE: A long-slandingjoke in machining, a "putting-on" tool is
what you send the new apprentice to the tool crib for when he makes
his first undersize pari.

Every machinisl's 100/ box eventually coliects a
number offavorite measuring lools.
...10' .....'""
87

there is a great selection of measuring tools available
that all work quite well. People seem to think tools
like this are a lot more valuable than they are. I have
seen people trying to sell a beat up one-inch
micrometer at a swap meet that I wouldn ' t even use
as a welding clamp. They may be asking more
money than you could buy a set of three new ones
at today' s prices.

hobby drawings don ' t have tolerances listed, and
you have to decide which parts are good or bad.
Don' t forget that a dimension taken on a part that
doesn't have the proper surface finish will come out
undersize after it is polished. Allow for this fact.
Technique and "feel" in using meosuring 10015
A delicate "feel" must be developed to measure the
small parts manufactured on tabletop machine tools.
Just because your micrometer has lines on it that
represent one ten thousandth of an inch (.0025mm)
it does not mean you can measure to that degree of
accurately without that special "feel". To develop
this feel you should start measuring things of known
dimension to see if you come up with the same
answer. If you have a friend that is skilled in taking
measurements, have them give you a lesson.
Machinists usually own their own measuring tools.
They develop confidence in these instruments and,
along with that "feel", they are sure their dimensions
are correct. You can't hold your head high in the
metal cutting trades until you can make parts to size.
Gage readouts
The actual readout on a measuring gage uses one of
three methods to come up with an accurate
dimension: The screw thread on a micrometer, the
Vernier scale on height gages, calipers and angle
reading devices or the new digital readouts found
on all types of modem measuring tools.

The cost of measuring does go up considerably when
you buy specialized tools. A good one-inch
micrometer could be purchased for around thirty
dollars (1997), but a thread micrometer could cost
three hundred dollars. As soon as you get away from
the basic "mikes" you are in the hundred-dollar
range.
Working with tolerances
Before getting into measuring, there is one more
concept I want you to understand and that is the
concept of tolerances. Tolerances are the limits
placed on any dimension by the designer of the part.
They are designed to make the part price as low as
possible while still making the part useable in
every combination with other parts of a given
assembly. Almost any engineer can design parts that
will work if tight tolerances are held. These parts
are almost impossible to build and can increase the
cost by a factor of ten. It takes a good engineer to
design parts within practical limits. The tolerances
are always given on commercial drawings, in fact,
we would refuse to bid a job unless every dimension
had a tolerance when we did contract machining.
You can't be arguing with a customer about how
they assumed you would know that the part you
made for them had to fit another part for which you
had never seen the drawing. Making parts that don't
work can be a financial tragedy when the quantities
are high and costs are in the thousands of dollars.
Before starting on any part, review the drawing and
convince yourself the part will work. When in doubt,
tighten the tolerance so you know it will work.

The screw thread on a micrometer is forty threads
per inch or has a pitch of .025" and a calibrated
movement of one inch. The metric micrometer has

Tolerances should be thought of as a percentage of
the dimension. For example, .001" (.02Smm) may
seem like a very tight tolerance when you are turning
or boring a diameter of three inches, but it would be
a two percent error on adiameterof.OSO" (1.27mm).
If you had the same limits for a three inch part, a
two percent tolerance would allow you a range of
.013" (.33mm). These are boilennaker's tolerances.
Obviously, small parts can't be manufactured to the
same tolerances as large parts and still work. Most

The digital readout of a modern caliper makes life
easy for a machinist. Readings in inches or
millimeters can be taken and translated back and
forth eliminating many o/the math errors associated
PIIO""u.Il~(o'
with dimension conversions.
88

a .S mm pitch and 2Smm total calibrated movement.
One of the reasons I don't like the metric system is
the way micrometers are calibrated. When you' re
using a inch model micrometer, all you have to do
to get a reading is add the reading to the size of the
gage. With metric models you have to add the range
of the micrometer to the reading. The problem is
the ran ge isn' t a simple numb er like th e in ch
system; It is 2S millimeters. If you are using a
micrometer with a range of7Smm to IOOmm you
can' t add your re'ading to the number one. You have
to add it to 7S. Thi s gives you an excellent way to
introduce mistakes into your calculations.

needs for these lovely tools, but I wouldn't purchase
too many until I had decided that cutting metal can
he fun.

Reading Vernier scales
The Vernier scale, named after its inventor, is used
on all kinds of products that measure lengths and
angles. They are quite simple to use and can be read
to .00 1" (.02Smm). The method they use to break a
scale into so many divisions without having a line
for each division is clever. For this examp le, let's
use a height gage that reads to one thousandth of
one inch (.02Smm). The basic scale is fixed and
divided into 20 parts per inch (2Smm). They can be
manufactured as long as needed. Eigh teen inches or
400mm would be common scales used on height
gages. Opposite thi s scale on the inch model is a
Vernier scale that has been divided into fifty parts
mount ed on the movable slide. Th e reason SO
divisions are used is because 1/20" (the uni ts into
whi ch the basic sca le has been divided) equa ls fi fty
thousandths of an inch. This provides an acc uracy
of one thousandth of an inch. The Vernier scale will
have only one line on its scale th at lines up with a
line on the basic scale for each one thousandth inch
movement unless the sett ing is zero. If you set the
Vernier scale at zero, you will find that the length
of fifty equally spaced marks on the Vernier scale
is equal to exact ly one di vision less than fift y
divisions on the basic scale. On the inch model used
in thi s example it would work out to be two inches
and four hundred fifty thousandths of an inch on

Pitch is the amount of movement the screw or nut
will move in one revolution. These threads have to
be precise and are usually made with a precision
thread roller. * Expensive micrometers will also have
a screw that has been ground. The same type of
measuring assembly is used on all micrometers.
They are mounted on different gages to make a very
large range of sizes. Micrometers are available that
have a range that can be expanded by changing a
spacer at the anvil end. They can be som ewhat
awkward to use because they feel out ofbalance.

Getting consistent readings with a micrometer
Micrometers also have a locking lever and a ratchet
thimble at the end ofthe barrel to allow you to apply
the same pressure each time when measuring. It is
still up to the user to determine if the reading is
correct. You can misread a micrometer by trying to
measure the surface of a part that isn't in line and
parallel with the anvil. If your mike is twisted on
the part or if the part is twisted, you can' t get an
accurate measurement. Surface finish has to be
considered when measuring. To read to four places
you can mentally interpo late between the lines or
use the verni er scale that is engraved opposite the
barrel, assuming your micrometer has thi s scale. I
have never understood why they don't manufacture
a micrometer with two inches of movement (SOmm),
particularly in larger sizes. This would certainly cut
down on the number of micrometers needed. (Maybe
I just answered my own question ... )

I

0

40

I
•

IIIII'lIi'lllll,i'lliu

Sherline machinists will need at least a zero-to-oneinch mike (O-2S mm) to start. Calipers can take care
of the larger dimensions you will come up with. As
you get more interested in machining, you will find

Vernier scales use a clever me/hod /0 come up with
u scale lhal reads to high levels ofaccuracy without
requiring a division on the main scale for every
increment. The reading on lhis scale is .867

·A point o f interest: Although the lead screws on Sherlinc tools are
not ground, a precision thread roller is used to make thcm . They are
accurate to within 99.97%.

89

the basic scale. As the slide is raised, the two lines
that line up with each other keep getting higher in
value until you get to fifty. At this time, the zero
line will also be lined up with a line on the basic
scale to start the process again. This is the only time
two sets of lines will line up at the same time.

shows which single line falls on the basic scale. I
start by looking where the zero on the Vernier scale
is and make a guess where I should start. For
example, if the zero falls about half way between
the divisions, I start with the twenty-five on the
Vernier.l try to look at more than one line ata time.
If you stare at a scale too long, your eyes may start
playing tricks on you. This usually happens right
after you have found the part you have been working
on for the last two hours is undersize.

The rules for reading Vernier scales are as follows:
First you read the basic scale where the zero line on
the Vernier lies on the basic scale in whole divisions.
Then add the amount on the Vernier, which is the
line on the Vernier scale that lines up with a line on
the basic scale. Remember the lines on the Vernier
scale only use the basic scales lines to line up with.
You don 't consider what these lines represent on
the basic scale. To accurately read a Vernier scale
you should view the lines at an angle that clearly

T

.2

MAl'' ' '

0+

10

Thinking about measurement in the
planning stages of your projed
Before starting any complex part you should
consider how you will measure it to assure its
accuracy. Sometimes the calibrated machine you are
using will be more accurate than your measuring
tools, but few of us have that much faith. We know
that the only thing worse than making a bad part is
sending the defective part out or using it ourselves,
so it must be checked. Once the part has been
produced it is too late ifit doesn ' t pass inspection .

20

IIIIIIII
I I I I II I I I I
I1111111 1111
VIINIEI SCAlE 0
10
•07

SHAfT

EXAMPLE I- Here is a very simple Vernier scale
and the key to how it works. In this example, divsions
on the main scale correspond to tenths, divisions on
the Vernier scale indicate hundredths. Ten divisions
on the Vernier scale are the same length as nine
divisions on the main scale, so that at any position
other than zero, only one of the pairs of lines will
line up exactly. The zero ofthe Vernier scale is past
.2 on the main scale. The seventh line on the Vernier
scale (07) lines up with a line on the main scale.
Therefore the reading is .2 + .07 or .27.

o

2

L

1S

I I I I I I I I I I EO

BARREL

10

EXAMPLE 3- A simple micrometer barrel. Each
whole number on the shaft is . 100 (inches or
millimeters). Each increment between the whole
numbers on the shaft is .025. Each number on the
rotating barrel is .001. This example reads .2 + .025
+ .014 which equals a reading 0/.239.

.0008--'

.~

SHAfT

o

.01

.02

.03

.04

BlJl.REl

.OS

.022

.3
EXAMPLE 4- A Vernier micrometer barrel. Each
whole number on the shaft is . 100 (inches or
millimeters). Each increment between the whole
numbers on the shaft is .025. Each number on the
rotating barrel is .001. Each number on the Vernier
scale is .0001 . The reading shown here is .3 + .075
+ .008 + .0008 which equals a reading 0/0.3838.

EXAMPLE 2- Above is an example like the one
mentioned in the text. Each division on the main
scale represents 1120" or .050". The small divisions
on the Vernier scale each represent .001 ". The zero
isjust past .45" on the main scale. The 22nd line of
the Vernier scale or .022" most exactly lines up with
a line on the main scale. Therefore the reading is
. 450 + .022 or .4 72".
90

expected. We ha ve thou ght these throu gh and
eliminated the possibility of these errors happening .
Errors sneak up on you from the blind side and you
don ' t see them coming. Thi s usually happens in
inspection where it is too late. Layout the job so
you have a plan to keep mi stakes from happening.
The job of a machini st is to make accurate parts.
The in spect ion department will prove a part good
or bad, but will never make a good part. Again. have
as much of a plan on how to measure your part as
you have to make it.

You have to build parts that are known to be good
before they get to inspection. This is what machining
is all about. You need a plan that doesn't allow
failure and the first line of defense is at the machine
you are using to make the part. A lead screw is very
accurate, and for a short movements it would be hard
to measure the error, but the mechanical load of
cutting metal makes cutters bend and machine tools
move. You can't be taking your part into inspection
after every cut because it is so difficult to mount it
to the machine again exactly the same way. I have
no way of solving this problem other than making
you aware of it. 1fT wrote a book about the errors I
have made in the machine trades you would have
trouble picking it up it would be so heavy. The
errors we encounter are very seldom the errors we

Measuring from surface plates

To make accurate measurements yo u need an
accurate surface to measure from. The surface can
be the part itsel f. If thi s isn't possible, a surface other
than the part is used. They call thi s a " surface plate" .

Measuring a part using a height gage on a surface plate.
91

Surface plates are usually made of a high quality
granite because the material is very stable. The
surface is ground to a fine, flat finish that doesn't
require lubrication. I usually keep the surface clean
with a spray bathroom cleaner. When the surface
gets dirty wit h oil and grit, you increase wear
between the instrument you are using and the
surface plate. Worse than that, you start losing the
feel it takes to get accurate measurements because
the instrument doesn ' t slide well and fee ls sticky. A
height gage should slide effortless ly across the
surface. For the home shop I would buy a "shop
grade" surface plate that is around twelve inches by
eighteen inches. The extra accuracy of an
"Inspection grade" plate would be hard to justify
against the extra cost for home use.

A dial indicator like this Starrett 'Last Word "
indicator can be used in many ways to check both
the accuracy of the alignment of your machine or
the size ofyour pariS.

The accuracy of your surface plate may be checked
with a height gage and a dial indicator. Clamp a
finger type dial test indicator in place of the scribe.
A rigid extension will improve this process because
the farther the test indicator is from the base, the
more it wi ll exaggerate the error. Set the indicator
to zero by raising or lowering the slide. Move the
height gage and watch the indicator. If the surface
plate is perfect, the reading will always be zero.
Imagine a boat that is going through waves. In a
calm sea the hoat is always aimed at the horizon,
but in a storm the boat may be pointed above and
below the horizon. You need to have room to use a
height gage and square around the part you are
checking. Diameters are easy to check with
micrometers and calipers, but checking parts on a
surface plate offers a different set of problems. Now
you will be measuring the "X", " Y" and "Z" axes.
Always measure the part the same way it is
dimensioned on the drawing. Don't let tolerance
build-up catch you sleeping. This happens when you
are working with a liberal tolerance that may control
a tight tolerance in another location of the part.
"THINK FIRST', cut later.

Dial indicators can be set to zero by rotating a
locking ring that moves the scale rather than the
pointer. They also have a wide variety of tips
available. Many have a magnetic base* attached to
them so you can measure the movements of slides
or sim ilar items that don't have calibrations. This
type of indicator may be inexpensive, but they are
not needed as often as the "finger" type.
The finger type is called a "dial test indicator", and
the dial moves by the rotational movement of the
finger. You can get errors in the distance indicated
according to the angle of the finger in relation to the
body, but the way these indicators are used, it isn't
normally a problem. These indicators are used to
square and locate. Their exact use is described in
appropriate places in thi s book, but here are a few
tips to be aware of: Don't buy an indicator of this
type that is too accurate for the job. A "tenth"
indicator, with one ten-thousandth of an inch
graduations, has too limited a throw to be useful.
They also bounce around so much they are difficult
to read. You need a small indicator for working with
Sherline tools, and I would recommend the Starrett
"Last Word" indicator. It is small and very stable.
The examples drawn or photographed in this book
will usually show this indicator.

Indicators

Indicators are neat little gadgets that come in a
variety of sizes. There are two types. One uses a
rack gear which engages a gear attached to the dial
pointer. This type has a wide ~ge of movements
avai lable; as much as four inches (lOOmm), and they
are accurate to less than .001" (.02Smm). Their
accuracy is governed by the accuracy of the rack
gear. As with any piece of measuring equipment,
you should determine its accuracy before using it.

*Remember that many orthe components ofSherline tools are made
from aluminum. For example, magnets will nOI Slick to the slides,
bUllhe lathe and mill column bed are both sleei. Sherline users have
al so attached sleel plates 10 Ihe wooden base boards 10 which Iheir
machines are mounled so that magnetic bases can be used.

92

pressure is being app li ed at the point of contact. On
very cl ose tolerance dimensions, the sc ribe is
replaced with a small finger type dial indicator. This
allows you to "zero" the indicator on a known height.
usually gage blocks. The reading of your he ight gage
is taken at zero and has to be accounted for when
your measurement is taken. The indicator should
be set to zero with very litt le movement or pressure
at the tip. The he ight gage should be used in a
delicate fash ion in this co nfi gu ration, because a
sudden jolt cou ld move the indicator and give you a
false reading. When in doubt, check it agai n.

I,..

Simple calipers come in many ~;hapes and sizes/or
measuring either inside or outside dimensions.
These have no readouts and are designed to lran.~ler
dimensions from the part fo the gage
Dial, Vernier and digital calipers
With calipers, you have a choice of dial , vernier,
and digital. They are used for both lathe and mill
work. The shape of a micrometer allows you to
measure the diameter for which it was designed. On
the other hand , measuring large diamete rs wi th
calipers may be impossible because the jaws are not
long enough. Cali pers are a must fo r your tool box.
They can read either inside or outside dimens ions.
Unless you are work ing in a very dirty environment,
you will be making a choice between dial and digital
calipers. Each has its own advantage. Dial calipers
read directly as the slide is moved. There is a sli ght
lag in digital calipers making them difficult to preset.
Di gital cali pers can be reset to zero at any place on
the slide, making the readings simple. They also read
both metric and inch dimensions with the push of a
button. On the other hand, I believe I can get more
accurate readings wi th dial calipers because they
have a better "feel".
Re-zeroing a dial caliper
Dial calipers have more problems with small pieces
of debris than any other type. They have a delicate

Height gages come in a wide variety of sizes and
readouts. Shown is a dial readout, bill digital
readouts are also available.
Haight gages
A height gage is a vertical scale attached to a
precision base and used mainl y on surface plates. It
usually has a Vernier scale, but is now avai lable with
a digital readout as well. (B y the way, just because
a readout is digita l, it doesn't mean it is more
accurate. Know what the accuracy of digital readouts
are before you put a lot of faith in them.) A
removable "scribe" is attached to a slide that travels
along a vertical scale. On better Vernier model s the
basic scale can be adjusted a small amount to zero
different probes. Readin g thi s sca le has bee n
previously discussed. The scribe is not pointed as
we nonnally think of scribes. In most cases, the point
is carbide and has only been ground from the top
down. This allows the user to use the bottom
surface of the scribe to measure heights. When these
measurements are taken, either the part or gage
should be moved to get the " fee l" of how much
93

Inside dimensions on large cylinders or between
parallel surfaces are taken with telescoping gages.
This set allows spacer rods of various lengths to be
added to the micrometer head to measure distances
offrom 2 to 8 inches.
Inside micrometers

When using dial calipers, make sure to clear all
chips from the measuring surfaces. Here a part is
checked for size as it is turned on the lathe. The
part is held in a collet pOI chuck which was machined
to size to hold ir.
rack gear driving the dial gear and will skip a tooth
if they get contaminated. This shows up when you
close them completely and the dial doesn't read zero.
When a dial caliper is purchased, a small, thin piece
of shim stock shaped like the letter "b" is included
with them to correct this problem. You purposely
put this shim into the gear train and allow the dial
gear to climb up on the shim, then move the shim
and try to get the dial gear to drop into the proper
tooth on the rack gear. It is easier to keep these tools
clean so you will not have to waste time resetting
them . The inside jaws can be checked by setting a
micrometer to an amount and reading the gap with
your ca lipers. You should get the same reading. If
you don ' t, you will have to consider this error when
measuring. This is also a good way to develop your
skill reading calipers. Even if you are working with
your own measuring tools you should always check
the tool against a standard before working on an
expensive part. This can be easily accomplished by
checking the zero reading on calipers.

In side mi c rometers are ve ry se ldom used by
individual s and are us ually only found in
professional inspection room s. Accurate readings
can be taken with a device called "small hole gages"
and "telescoping gages." They both offer a method
of transposing a dimension to your micrometer that
can then be read. You put these devices in the hole
you are checking and expand them until they are
touching both sides. On hole gages a tapered shaft
expands a split ball. On the telescopin g gage a
compression sp ring ex pa nd s the gage to the
maximum allowed b y the hole di ameter. The
telescoping gage can then be locked while the hole
gage relies on friction to maintain its size. It is very
important that you develop the "feel" using these
tools. Rock the handle end to judge the amount of
pressure the contact points are subjected to. If it
clicks past center, the gage should be reset. When
transcribing this setting to a micrometer, the same
"feel" is important to get the reading the way it was
obtained at the part. You should be able to measure
hole diameters with less than .00 I" (.025 mm) of
error. Be careful of tapered parts and particularly
with milled cavities. End mill s deflect according to
the way they are bei ng used; that is, conventional
94

""""' ..... lllllllT, •.

you should check the depth reading at zero on a
smooth flat surface and compensate for any erro r. It
is imperative that depth measuring in strumen ts be
held square to the surface when being used. Depth
mikes are sold in sets that have interchangeable rods
for each ran ge or the micrometer. Each rod is
adjustable. bUI they arc usuall y set perfec tl y when
th ey are purchased . Th ey do not co me with
standard s. so you will need to come up with a method
to check them. Depth micrometers read backwards
in comparison with a reg ul ar micrometer. The
number gets bigger as the barrel is sc rewed in.

Optical comparators
Comparators are optical dev ices and wor k by
accurately makin g a shado w of the part and
portraying it on a calibrated screen , usuall y ground
glass. The sl ide mo vem e nt can be meas ured,
allowing the operator to measure the part. In many
cases the part is too small to be measured with
conventional measuring tools. You can also use them
to check curves. On better comparators there are a
variety of lenses to work with. These optics must
be ground correctly to eliminate any distortion that
would create errors. The operator must focus a
comparator sharply for accurate readings. These
devices are not usuall y found in the home workshop,
but you should be aware that they exist.

On a depth micrometer the numbers read opposite
a regular micrometer; that is, they gel bigger as the
barrel is screwed in.
milling or climb milling, and it is possible to cut a
"pocket" (square or rectangle shape cut into a flat
surface) that is bigger at the bottom than the top. By
dragging the gages up and down the measured
surface, they can be checked for taper.

Depth micrometers
Depth micrometers are handy, but to save money
most home machinists will usually use the depth
rod on calipers to get these dimensions. With calipers

A selection of gage pins and gage blocks make
measuring a ::.pecific dimension easier. In many
cases you can make your own as you need them.

Gage pins and gage blocks
Gage pins and blocks are another way of checking
fits and checking the gages you work with. Small
holes can be very difficult to measure. The best way
is to have a pin or a known size and see how it fits.
This is an item that has a spot in all inspection rooms,
although they are a little pricey ror the home

The optical comparator in Sherline 's measurement
room determines dimensions that would be difficult
or impossible using olher methods.
95

workshop. You can buy these gage pins in an
amazing number of sizes. They are usually bought
by the set. A set that could be useful to the miniature
machinist would be one that goes to .250" (6mm)
and will cost around $100 (1998). A gage pin is
included for each .001" starting at .050" (Imm).
These pins are hardened and gr~und to precision.

of the shaft. To that dimension add 1/2 the known
shaft diameter. You now have the distance from the
edge of the part to the centerline of the spi ndle.
Rotate the hand wheel on the axis being set exactly
this distance and you will have the centerline of the
spindle lined up with the edge of the part from which
you measured.

Gage blocks are sometimes called "10 blocks" after
the person who invented them. They are sold in
different grades and the "shop grade" should take
care of the needs of a home machinist because they
are amazingly accurate.

The second method is much easier. It involves the
use of a clever tool called an "edge finder". These
labor saving devices have been around for years and
have two lapped surfaces held together by a spring.
One surface is on the end of a shaft which fits in a
3/8" end mill holder and is held in the spindle. The
other is a .200" diameter shaft held to the larger shaft
with a spring so it is free to slide around. With the
spindle running at approximately 2000 RPM the
shorter shaft will he running way off center. As this
shaft is brought into contact with the edge you are
trying to locate in relation to the spindle, the .200"
shaft will be tapped to the center as the spindle
rotates. This keeps making the .200" shaft run
continually truer. When the shaft runs perfectly true
it makes contact with the part 100% of the time.
This creates a drag on the surface of the shaft that
will "kick" it off center. At this point you know the
part is exactly .100" (half the diameter) from the
centerline of the spindle. Advancing the handwheel
.100" (on a Sherline mill two revolutions at .050"
per revolution) will bring the edge of the part into
alignment with the spindle.

When working at home, don't think you need every
dev ice I have mentioned. Before you start ajob you
can make many of the gages you may need. It only
takes a momcnt to turn and polish a diameter to size.

Using on edge finder to lo(ate the edge of a part
There are two quick methods of "picking up an edge"
of a part on a mill. The first is to put a shaft of known
diameter in the spindle and see that it runs perfectly
true. Using a depth micrometer against the edge of
the part, measure the distance to the outside diameter
SPINDLE

•
3{3" SHAFl

PART

It is important to use a high quality edge finder such
as the Starrett 827A shown in the previous column
It must have a 3/8" shaft to fit the end mill holder
on the Sherline mill. Metric sized edge finders are
also avai lable which work in the same manner.

.200" DI.l SHAFl

Using an "edgejinder" to accurately locale the edge
of a parI.

The sine bar
The "sine bar" gage is worth mentioning. It was
given this name because it uses the sine of an angle
to determine how much the bar, or plate, has to be
tipped up to represent that angle. (The sine of a
number and other trigonometric values can be found
in trig tables or determined with the push of a button
on scientific calculators.) The sine of the angle is
then multiplied by the length of the bar and this gives
you the amount to raise the end. The base of a sine
bar is two round bars that have their centers exactly
spaced apart as stated. As one end is tipped up, the
round bar rolls on the surface plate. The bar end
you are placing the calculated amount under, usually
with "jo blocks", will always rest at a point that keeps

The Starrelt 827A edgefinder has a 3/8" shaji which
willfit in a Sherline 3/8" end mill holder.
96

"Dykem" is bru shed or sprayed on a clean surface
of the part. A thin laye r is bes t beca use it dri es
quicker and won' t chip when a line is scribed. The
purpose of thi s fluid is to hi ghlight the sc ribed line.
Don't prick pun c h the sc rib ed c ro ssed lin es
representing a hole ce nter. Using a center dri ll in
the mill spindle and a magnifyi ng glass, bring the
headstoc k down until the ce nter d rill j ust bare ly
touches the scribed cross. Exam ine the mark left with
a magnifying glass and make any correcti ons needed
to get it perfectly on ce nter. T he average pe rson
should be able lO locate the spindl e within .002" to
.003" (.05mm to .075mm) of the center usin g thi s
method.

A sille bar Ilses the sille fimctionJrom the trig (abies
and (he tength oJthe bar 10 accurately establish all
angle Jor milling.
the stated distance constant, because each end will
roll the same amount. The length of the sine bar is
actually th e hypote nu se of a right tri angle. Thi s
distance has to be very accurate because a thirtysecond (1/ 120°) reading on a five-inch sine bar would
be less than .00 I ". They are used for acc urately
checki ng angles.
For example, suppose you had to measure an angle
to degrees and minutes with a tolerance of plus or
minus ten minutes of a degree. Seconds are ve ry
se ldo m used because a second is 1/1.296.000 of a
revolution. This a very small amount and wi ll never
be ca ll ed out exact ly except by as tronome rs or
surveyors. Using a five-inch si ne bar, you look up
the sine of the angle you need to set the bar to and
multipl y it times fi ve. If you don ' t have a Jo block
set you can machine a block lO the right length and
ge t it as accurate as you need. A set of slidin g
parallels could also be used. The plates on sine bars
have holes drilled and tapped to clamp the work
down with. It is imperati ve that the work is clamped
down square with the sine bar. A second right angle
plate is used lO accomplish this. The angle can then
be checked with dial test indi calOr mounted to a
height gage. A zero runou t would be a perfect angle.

Working to scribed layout lines
The most common practice whe n workin g with a
mill is lO layout the hol e ce nters and other key
locations using a height gage and a surface plate. A
co loring (usually deep blue) called layout fluid or

Once the fir st ho le is loca ted in thi s man ne r,
add itional ho les ca n be located us ing th e
hand whee ls. (Thi s is where the optional resettab le
"zero" hand whee ls are handy .) No w the sc ribed
marks are used as a double check and the hand wheels
take care of the acc uracy . Don ' t forg et lO account
for the backlash of the lead screw by always tuming
the hand wheels in the same direction as you go fro m
one point to the next. More on backlash can be found
on page 258, and an example of lay ing out a si mple
hole pattern usi ng trigonometry and your mi ll 's
handwheels is included on page 323.

Ma chining to layout lines on you r part is a good
way to get close to your desired dimension. Final
dimellsiollS are achieved through keeping track oj
your lumdwheet inputs and double checking with
accurate measurement tools.

A digital readout makes a machinist's life easier. Much like air conditioning on a car or a microwave oven
in the kitchen, once you've galien used 10 it you wonder how you ever got by without it. Now tabletop
machinists using Sherline mills can benefit from the same hardware that has hecome so popular on full
size mills by adding a D.R.O to their mill. It reads out to three decimal places and resets to zero with the
(Ollch of a bullOn. The readout also indicates spindle RPM at all times. Backlash can be compensated/or
to a haJj a thousandth 0/ an inch No more counting handwheel rotations. Just set the axes to zero and
crank in the desired (able position.

98

SECTION l-General Mmhining

Chapter 8- Coolants and cuHing oils
Coolant in industrial applications

Water soluble coolants vs. oil type coolants

When you are working with machines as small as
Sherline tools, calling the fluids "coolant" can be a
bit misleading. In producti on mac hinery, these
fluid s are used to lubricate and cool the cutt ing
process. The entire part will be flooded with coolant
and it will be carrying heat and debris away . Notice
that I mentioned debris. Chips can be made at a very
rapid rate, and it takes a large vo lume of cutting
fluid to control these chips. Most modern machincs
will use a ninety-five percent water based mixture
for cutting metal. Water is still one of the best heat
t ran sfe r materials o n earth desp ite it s ready
availability and almost negligible cost.

There are many types of water so lubl e coo lants
avai lable for different materia ls. Water so lubl e oi l
will mix with water and was very popu lar until the
new synthetic c utting o il s camc on the ma rk et.
Solub le oil wi ll go rancid it'it li es stilL espec iall y in
warm weather. If pure oil were used on a modern
machine it wo uld probably catch on lire. Oil type
coolants are still used in machines that use the oil to
lubricate both the machine and the cutt ing process.
An "automatic sc rew machine" is a good example
because of all the mechani sms that arc ex posed to
the machining process. Now let' s take a look at the
lise of coolan t in a home shop environment.

In industrial applications, parts being cut are flooded wilh coolanl 10 carry away heal and dehris. In the
home shop, culling loads are lower, less heat is generated and fluids c..re used as a luhricant to keep
material from sticking /0 the Cull ing too/. Flooding a parI with coolant is mes.\y and nol necessary.
99

Coolant in the home shop
The purpose of "coolant" in the home shop is to
keep material from sticking to the cutting tool. When
material sticks to the tool, the flutes may clog up,
generating heat from friction and stopping the
cutting action. If you are determined to machine
without coolant, you'll be breaking cutters and
ruining work. You really must use it to be successful,
and any type of coolant is better than none. I usually
use an oil type and apply it sparingly with a small
acid brush. You don't want to use an expensive brush
for this operation because there is a good chance
the brush may get a haircut if it gets caught by a
cutter.
Purchasing coolant in small amounts
Purchasing coolants in small amounts is a problem
encountered by most home machinists. If you went
to a good hardware store and asked for cutting oil,
they would probably try to sell you thread-cutting
oil. This type is available in small amounts, but it
has a very high sulfur content and it is black. It's
dirty and smelly. but it does help produce a good
thread on difficult-to-machine metals that "tear" in
the cutting process. For machining. however, I
would stay away from it like the plague. The next
place you might try to purchase cutting oil would
be an industrial supplier or a mail order company.
They usually don 't sell small quantities*, and they
try to sell a mixture of ingredients that is normally
used for tapping holes. The problem is that when
working with small machines you often have your
nose close to the machine, and the bad smell makes
that a disagreeable prospect. I would even consider
it a health hazard if you constantly worked with it.
The easiest way out would be to buy five gallons of
an oil type cutting fluid, the smallest amount sold,
from a local oil company and you'll have a lifetime
supply for working with miniature machine tools.
You might get some fellow machinists to split the
purchase with you and you'll all have plenty.

For home use, a small amount of lubricant applied
with an inexpensive brush is sufficient. Avoid smelly,
surfur ladenjluids like oils usedfor tapping threads.

Some precautions when using cutting oils
Cutting oils have a higher flash point than regular
oils which reduces the chance of fire. Kerosene has
been used with a mixture of oil and will give good
finishes on aluminum, but r wouldn't use it because
of its smell and low flash point. Automobile oils
are too "slippery" and smell too bad from detergents
to work with. The surface finish will suffer from
the use of these types of oil. To summarize, don 't
flood the cutting surface on a miniature machine
tool unless you want to make a big mess. Apply a
small amountof cutting oil with a small, inexpensive
brush and also brush the chips away with this same
brush. Avoid smelly fluids. Wear eye protection to
keep not only debris out your eyes, but also cutting
fluids.

*NOTE : Some industrial suppliers .now offer cutting fluids in
quantities as small as I gallon. Check with your favorite
supplier. The higher unit price is well worth the savings
compared to buying far more than you need.

100

SEGION I-General Machining

Chapter 9- General machining terms
General rules for cuHing speeds,

feed rate. and depth of cut

,

'"II"' " "'.,

Three term s frequently used in machining are

"speed", "feed" and "depth of cut", Reference to
the diagrams below will show what is meant by these
terms. No rmal turning on a lathe, when used to
reduce the diameter of a wo rk piece, invo lves
advancing the cutting tool perpendicularly to the
lathe bed by an appropriate amount (depth of cut)
and feeding the tool along parallel to the lathe bed
to remo ve material over the desired length. The
diameter will be reduced by twice the depth of cut
because the tool doesn't cut just one side.

~! "Y" .wS)

Mill clllling terms
Effects of (uHing rates on toolljfe

"Cui" and "feed" on a lathe
In normal machining on a Sherline lathe, the depth
of cut can be directly set by the crosslide handwheel.

Speed, feed and depth of cut all have an effect on
tool li fe . Speed is the rate the cutting tool is moving
in relation to the material being cut. Speed has the
greatest effect on too l life of a ny of the three
variables mentioned , which is why it is menti oned
so many times in this book. I don ' t want you to ruin
perfectly good cutting tools by breaking these simple
rul es. For example. a 114" diameter drill cu tting
stainless steel should have a correct cutting speed
of 800 RPM. Thi s is a speed that can easi ly be
exceeded on all but the largest lathes. The Sherline
lathe and mill are capable of2800 RPM and at half
that speed, the drill could be ruined. The largest
diam eter of the stoc k to be turned sho uld be
considered when determining the cutting speed on
a lathe. With Sherline tools it is so easy to adjust
the RPM that it would be beneficial to adjust the
speed to the diameter you are worki ng o n.

Some lathes are manufactured wi th a dial on the
crosslide that is calibrated to the actual "change in
diameter". This is common and is a good question
to ask before using a different lathe. Sherli ne 's lathe
has a crosslide that reads directly. This allows the
crosslide to be used as a milling table and have the
calibrated handwheels readi ng correctly. The feed
is provided by the handwheel on the end of the bed.
When fac ing off the end of a work piece held in a
chuck or faceplate, the depth of cut is set by the
hand wheel on the end of the bed, and the feed is
provided by the crosslide hand wheel. If the work
extends beyond the safe working limits, additional
support may be needed. A center or steady rest
should be considered.
NORMAL TURNING

FACING

Turning CNC machines will automatically adjust
their spindle speed as the diameter is decreased,
sav ing those valuable seconds. Remember a lso that
the main difference between a lathe and a mill is
that on a lathe the work turns, while on a mill the
tool turns.

FEED

CuHing speed vs. type of tool and material being (ut

Lathe cutting terms
lIeulll and IIfeed" on a mill

When using a mill , cut is determined by the amount
of depth the cutter is set to by the Z-axis handwheel.
Feed is supplied by either or both the X- or Y-axis
handwheels depending on the desired direction of
the cut.
101

When co ns ide rin g cutting s pe eds, only th e
difference in speed between the tool and work should
be considered. However, the type of tool that is being
used may dictate a different cutting speed. Different
tool shapes will have cutting speeds that not only
consider the type of material being machined and
the material the tool is made out of, but also consider

the chip "flow". Drill s are a good example of this.
A drill, deep in a hole, can't get rid of chips the
same way a lathe tool can. Basic cutting speed charts
for materials represent lathe tools. Drills and simi lar
tools have a much lower cutting speed. A home
mac.hinist must work with speeds that are well below
the calculated speeds because it is quicker in the
long run. It isn't worth the effort to calculate the
exact rpm of a machine that is going to make one or
two cuts, but it is time well spent if thousands of
similar parts are to be made. A portion of a chart
showing these differences is provided below.
Machinery 's Handbook will provide tables in greater
detail should you need more information.

GUIDE TO APPROXIMATE LATHE TURNING SPEEDS
MATERIAL
Col s..... 1/4·1.... ) '/2" I''''.) 1" (25"'111)
!.F.M.

S inl"" 303
••
S inl"" 304
••
S inl"',316
••
S.oel, 12114
S'oel,1018
S'oel,4130
Gray (ast Iran
Aluminum, 7075
Aluminum, 6061
Aluminum, 2024
Brass

67
50
47
174
87
82
57
400
375
268
400

DI_

0511111_

With big machines in a production environment,
time is money, so feed rates and cutting speeds are
critical. Saving time and making partsfast is not as
big afactor for the home machinist.

DIo_

1000 RPM 500 RPM 250 RPM
800
400
200
700
350
175
2600
1300
650
1300
650
300
1250
650
300
450
220
900
2800
2800
1400
2800
2800
1400
2800
2000
1000
1400
2800
2800

Calculating spindle speed for cuHing
To calculate the RPM's of a cutter or work piece,
you first must know the cutting speed ofthe material
that is being machined and the material from whi ch
the cutter is made. High speed steel wi ll be our
standard tool material, and cutters that use carbide
tips will be considered separately. You could fill a
library with all the books written on speeds and
feeds, and the reason is simple. Time is money, and
when parts are being manufactured in large
quantities, you have to use the most efficient method
to machine a part. The few seconds of time that is
saved on each part will be multiplied by the total
number of parts manufactured, giving the total time
saved. As an example, a part might be produced for
the automobile industry at a rate of three million
parts per year. A clever machinist comes up with a
way to save three seconds per part. This will save
around 2500 hours, which would probably be worth
over $ 100,000 to the company. The corporation
would probably award the machinist with a "thank
you" and a check for around $300 and the managers
would take all the credit for the increased profits. (1
guess I've been reading "Dilbert" comic strips for
too long.) With thi s kind of money at stake, you
must get it right, which is why books go into such
detail on speeds and feeds. Horne shop machini sts,
however, need not clutter their minds with a bunch
of complicated tables. Since production speed is not
usually a factor in home shop work, knowing a few
simple rules and speeds will keep you out oftrouble.

CuHing speed
Proper cutting speed is the rate a particular material
can be machined without damaging the cutting edge
of the tool that is machining it. It is based on the
surface speed of the material in relationship to the
cutter. This speed is a function of both the RPM of
the spindle as well as the diameter of the rart or
size of the cutter, because, as the part diameter or
cutter size increases, the surface moves a greater
distance in a single rotation. If you exceed this ideal
speed, you can damage the cutting tool. In the lathe
and mill instructions we give some examples of
suggested cutting speeds, but what I wanted to get
across here is that the damage doesn't occur slowly.
It isn't a case of gettin g only one hour of use
instead of two. A tool can be destroyed injust a few
seconds. The cutting edge actually melts. If you
machine tough materials like stainless steel, you will
ruin more tools than you care to buy if you don't
pay a lot of attention to cutting speeds.
102

If you work in the inch system , there is an easy way
to c alculate the spindle spee d. Mu ltiply the
material's recommended cutting speed (given in feet
per minute) times four. Then divide the answer by
the diameter of the work (lathe) or cutter (mi ll) given
in inches. This wi ll give you an approximate answer
that is more than accurate enough to use while
working on Sherline or simi lar miniature machine
tools. Here is the fonnula:
CSx4

Example: Si nce the cutter in the examp le above is a
mi ll , the speed would be mu ltiplied by .9 to give a
fina l s peed of 960 RPM (i nch ) or 9 17 RPM
(metric). If the speed in the example above were for
a dri ll , you would mult iply the answer by the factor
.7 which would lower the spindle RPM to 747 (inch)
or 7 I 3 (metric) . T he factor listed for tap s is, of
course, only for automatic machines or for use with
a tapping head, as you could never hand tap that fast.

= RPM

END MillS (Slot ond side milling)

D

MATERIAl
Stoinless Steel, 303
Stoinless Steel, 304
Stoinless Steel, JI6
Steel,12114
Steel,1018
Steel. 4130
Gray Cos! Iron
A1uminum, 707S
Aluminum, 6061
Aluminum, 2024
Aluminum, (cst
8'm

CS = CUlling Speed of the material from your
table in SFM (Surface Feet per Minute)
4 =feet-to-inches conversion factor ( 12) di vided
by n (3.14 159) = 3.82 which is rounded off to 4
D = Diameter of part (lathe) or culler (m ill ) in
inches
RPM = Spindle speed
By rounding off the conversion factor, it makes
this formula easy enough to do in your head in
most cases, yet it is sti ll accurate enough.

If the metric system is used, the cutt ing speed
will be g iven in meters per minute and the
diameter will be given in mi ll imeters. The same
problem would be worked out as shown below
using 3.14 to equal the value for It.
30.39 x 1000 = RPM or 30,390 = 1019 RPM
3. 14 x 9.5
29.83

( 1000 = th e co nv e rsion from meters to
millimeters in which the diameter is given.)

Afador for Ihr shape of the (uHing 1001
There is one more factor to consider when estimating
spindle speeds (RPM). Cutting speeds are given for
a lathe tool unless otherwise stated. This is the most
optimistic number given for cutting speeds and must
be modified for other types of cutters, as using them
at the suggested speeds will shorten the ir cutting
life. Multiply the calculated spind le speed by the
fol lowing factors for the following types of tools:
End mills = .9
Reamers = .6
Drills = .7
Taps = .25

I/S- DtA.

IW D
tA.

3/8- DtA.

~

1200 RPM
1100

600 RPM

400 RPM
350
300

M
~

Coo",

Aluminum. Bar
Aluminum. (ast

SOO

""

67

'"~

..

II..
SOO

,."
800
,."

27
~

2800
2800
2800
2800
2800

300

,.,
'"

.
,~

CUT SPEED 15.f.M.1
~
~

24

n
1~

m

!SO

SOO
2SOO
2SOO
2SOO

,."

~

DRillS
MATERIAl
CorbonSteel
Cos! Iron, Soft
Stainless Steel

Example: On a mi ll , what RPM should a 3/8"
(.375") diameter high speed steel cutler tum if it
is to have a 100 fpm cutting speed?
lOOx4 (orlOOx4= IOO x 4 x8 ) =1067RPM
.375
3/8
3

CUT SPUD (S.F.M.1

350

350

250
,."
,."
,."

,."

..
.

Il.

2800

2800

l fW DtA.
2000 RPM

,
,

,."
,."
,."

IW D
I.l.
S50 RPM

.SO
3611

1100
,."
,."

Here is a chart showing some approximate clllling
speeds for end mills and drills ill selected materials.

Feed Rales
When operating manu al tools, often the o perator
may not be able to move the handwheels fast enough
to accomplish ideal feed rates. It is a better choice
to slow down the spindle speed rather than taking
feed cuts that are so fin e they wi ll work harden the
surface, dull the cutter or induce tool "chatter".
Other than speed, feed rate is the other great force
that has an effect on too l life. Althoug h feed is
described in many ways, it is always describing the
amount of material that is removed by eac h cutting
edge per revolution of the spind le. Many times you
will find it desc ribed as inches per minute (or mml
min.). With the infonnation we now have, it is easy
to calculate a sin gle toot h's feed rate. Feed rate
contro ls deflection by either the tool or work and
turns into a load that has a very dramatic effect on
accuracy. It is imposs ible to consistent ly work
accurate ly with tools that are defle cting , and the
amount they defle ct is depcndcnt on both the depth
of cut and the feed rate. (See "End Mill s" on page
8 1 in Chapter60fthis section.)
103

li ght enough to all ow fairly rapid feed rates. The
depth of a cut has the least effect on tool life, but the
most effect on tool loads. This can really become a
problem when machining parts that can ' t always be
clamped in fixtures des igned for the job. You must
work with what you have, and you don ' t need as
much iffast.li ght cuts are taken . A part will se ldom
be ruined by taking too li ght a cut. The deeper the
cut, the more successful machinin g will be
dependent on a li beral amount of coo lant.

The most important rule in machining
Before attempting to machine any metal, please try
to remember this simple rule:

"If Ihe 100/ cit allers, decrease speed
alld increase feed. "

The c.:olor screen aI/ached to this large computer
n mtrolled shop lathe shows a tremendolls amount
oj inJormation about the Clits being made. Th e tool
shape is shown in red, the cut in magenta and the
part outline in blue. A real time on-screen sequence
shows the tools being changed and the shape oJthe
part as it is cuI.

Understanding thi s simple rule can save you many
hours of grief. When the tool "chatters". it is not
cutting in a continuous fashion . Metal li kes to be
machined in a way that allows the material to come
off in a continuous strip while the tool is in contact
with the metal. (See photo on page 137.) If the tool
is not fed at a rate that is fast enough, the too l skips
along the surface, occasionally digging in. The
surface of the tool that is doing the most cutting
will find a frequency of vibration that is a product
of all the variables involved . Thi s can cause anything

Computers in the modern machine shop
New CNC machines can be programmed to feed a
given amount per revolution. Mechanical milling
machines which control their feed rates with gears
have the feed rate give n in inches per minute.
Today's professional machini sts no longer must
compromi se their feed and speed rates by worki ng
with a few sets of gears. Theirehoiees are unlimited.
Each cut has it s ow n idea l feed and spee d .
Sometimes a change of only a couple of percentage
points will get rid of a harmonic vibration that is
giving you fit s. This can be noticed when working
wit h manual mac hines as the speed or feed is
chan ged. In the old days a machini st would be
changing gears on automatic machines until they
found the best compromise. Now they simply edit
the computer program. Changing gears on automatic
machines could be a miserabJejob because of their
location. In the age of the computer, a machini st is
now in charge ofthe computers that are in charge of
the machines. Often these computers are many times
more sophisticated than the business computers in
the front office.

Chatter marks at the right hand end oJthis hydraulic
scale piston indicate that an adjustment is needed
in the speed andJeed rate. Chatter means the tool is
bouncing and cutting intermittently rath er than
peeling off material in one continuous sheet as it
should be. Th e area to the left oj the chatter marks
shows theftnish after the spindle speed was redllced.

What about your machine shop?
On a manual machine the speed and feed is being
controlled by the best computer in the world ... your
brain. If yo u use it, that is. When a cut is being taken
on a manual machine, I prefer a depth of cut that is
104

from a hi gh pitched whine on light, high speed cuts
to a resonating racket that can rip the work out of
the chuck on heavy cuts.

in half, twice as much metal must be removed with
each rotation of the tool or part to get to the end of
the cut in the same amount of time. The chip is twice
as thick, so the feed is greater at lower RPM if the
feed RATE stays constant.

Just to see what would be a comfortable cut in
several common materials, r experimented a bit and
came up with 'some fi gures using a Sherline mill.
For a list of sample cuts see page 191 in the section
on using the mill. A chart on page 135 gives some
sampl e lathe turning speeds for various materials
and diameters.

AchaHering tool gets dull faster
A chattering tool will also get dull faster because
the cutting edge will chip. Many times the chips
may be microscopic, but they are there. This
happens because the cutting edge must keep cutting
through the previously machined surface which has
become "work hardened". As you can imagine, there
are limits to how much you can increase the feed
rate, so the answer lies in adjusting both speed and
feed to achieve the proper cut.

How deneasing speed automatically increases feed
If you maintain the same feed rate and reduce the
RPM, the feed will illcrease because the chip will
be thicker. If at first that sounds wrong, think of it
thi s way: At the same feed rate, if you cut the RPM

"They dOli" make them like they used to," alld;ll tlt;s case, that's good. CNC mach illes like tltis one that
make parts both quickly and to very close tolerances are a big factor ill how SherJine tools and other
prqducts can be made continualJy better while maintaining a low price.
105

Modeling tricks of the trade from Phil Ma"son
Making a hollow ship' s ventilation funnel
In modeling, if you have to make one of something
you might make it one way, but when you have to
duplicate a number of parts, a semiproduction
process is needed. Here is a clever method master
modelmaker Phil Mattson came up with to make a
number of ship's funnels for the Pacific Star.
1. A wooden model of the inside size of the funnel
is carved from wood. A box and sprues are made to
create a mold of the part.

2. The mold is filled with Redi-Mold™ material.
Once hardened. the mold is opened and the wooden
shape removed, leaving a cavity.
3. Cerro-Bend™ is a metallic material that melts at
around the boiling point of water. It is melted on a
stove and poured into the mold.
4. The mold is opened, the Cerro-Bend funnel is
removed, the sprues are cut off and the shape is filed
and sanded to a good finish.
5. The Cerro-Bend funnel is wired for electo-plating
with copper. The copper electrode is also shown.
6. The part is plated using current from a batte!),
charger until a coating about .015" thick is built up .
7. (Left) The coated Cerro-Bend funnels. (Right)
The plating is removed from the top opening of the
funnel. The funnels are reheated and the Cerro-Bend
melts and flows out, leaving just the copper shell.
The opening is hand finished.
8. The parts are painted and installed on the model.

106

SECTION I- General Machining

Chapter 10- Lubrication and maintenance
Cleanliness is one of the keys to accuracy

LEADSCREWS-Sewing machine oil should be placed
along all the threads regul arl y. At the same time,
chec k that the threads are free from any metal chips.
Use a bru sh to keep them clean.

In order to pcrfonn with consistent accuracy. all

machine tools, regardless of size, must be kept clean,
lubricated and adjusted . Complaints about the lack
of accuracy of a machine can onen be traced to a
stray metal chip under a part, a dinged up thread or
dent in a mating su rface. Before threading a chuck
or end mill ho lder onto a spindle, both the male and
fema le threads as well as the seat ing surfaces mu st
be free from dings and chips. Accuracy of co ll ets or
the seating of a tapered center or arbor can also be
affec ted by chip s. Keep yo ur tools and work
s urface cl ean by brushing off chips often and

TAILSTOCKSPINDLE-W ind out the spindle as far as it
will go, wipe it off and lightl y oil it with sewin g
machine o il.

HANDWHEELS-A few drops of li ght oil behind the
handwhee l will reduce fri cti on between surfaces and
make operation easier and smoother.

HEADSTOCK BEARINGS-The bearings o n S herline
machines are lubricated at the factory for the li fet ime
of th e mac hine and s ho uld not nee d furth e r
lubrication. DO NOT break the seals.

sweeping or vac uuming them up.

lubrication
Keeping all the moving parts of your machines and
accessories lubricated wi ll nOl on ly make them easier
to operate, it will also extend thei r life. Here are
some of the main surfaces that need lubricating and
so me suggested lubri ca nt s to keep the m in top
condition:

MOTOR-Sherline machines use sealed ball bearings
which require no maintenance.

CHUCKS - On self centering chucks you should clean
and lubricate the jaws each time they are removed
and reversed. Make sure they are clean and free of
chips before they are reinserted back into the scroll.
Independent jaw chucks like the 4-jaw should also
be checked often to make sure there are no chips on
the threads or working surfaces and that the threads
are lubricated with li ght oil. Check also that the
spindle threads and seating surface on the back of
the chuck is clean before installing it on the spindle.
Chucks may be w iped down with light oil or sprayed

MACHINE SLIDES-Use a li g ht o il such as sew ing
mac hine oil o n all poi nts where the re is s liding
contact . Thi s should be done immediately after each
cleanup. At the factory, the s lides are greased to
ensure the lubricat ion stays in place during shipping,
but li ght o il will work fine once you begin using the
mach ine .

..,10.
I
I
I

HIADSTO(J

IUllMS

UADSCIfW5

I
I
I
I

_....

TAUSYOCJ
lPllOOU

"...nao POtOm - - - NO u..cAnotf _ _ _ _

"""""
107

with a spray lubricant/preservative when put away
to keep them from rusting.

General precautions when using
miniature machine tools
• WEAR EYE PROTECTION AT ALL TIMES!
• If you haven't already done so, read the safety rules
for power tools at the beginning of this book.
• Do not attempt to use the lathe or mill without
first securing them to a mounting board or
directly to your bench. The mounting board keeps
them from tipping and allows the machines to be
easily moved and stored. Rubber feet on the bottom
of the board reduce noise and vibration that occur
when the machine is mounted directly to a bench.

• DON'T OVERTIGHTEN! One of the biggest
problems in designing and manufacturing small
metal cutting tools is the fact that the operator can
physically be stronger than the machine. This is not
normally the case with big machines. For example,
a IO-pound force applied a couple of inches out on
a hex key becomes a 650-pound force at the tip of
the screw. If you tighten both screws on the tool
post this tight, it becomes approximately 1300
pounds of force on relatively small parts. Tools or
parts can become distorted and accuracy is lost.
Overtightening hold-down screws and T-nuts in their
slots can distort the crosslide or mill table. It is not
necessary to overtighten parts and tools because
loads are smaller on equipment of this size. Save
your equipment and extend its life by not
overtightening and by taking lighter cuts.

Then tum the machine back on and resume cutting
using a lighter load. If your motor is overheating on
a regular basis, it means you are taking too heavy a
cut or operating at too high an RPM for long
periods. Slow your speed down, reduce your cut or
feed rate and you should have no further problems .
Due to the nature of miniature machining,
overloading the machine is a common problem. It
is often tempting to try to speed up the process by
working faster. Keep in mind this is a small machine
and work with patience and precision. Don' t be in a
hurry. Your parts will come out better and your
machine will last much longer.
• Regularly Check the tightness of bolts and
screws. Vibration from operation can cause fasteners
to loosen up. Also check all fittings on a new
machine before using it to make sure nothing has
loosened up during shipping.

Here is a beautiful oak and plexiglass storage unit
and work surface that was custom made many years
ago. It includes drawers for storage ofaccessories.

• Don't overstress the motor. It is important to
remember that you can overload the motor on a small
lathe or mill. The many variables involved in
machining, such as hardness of material, size of
cutter, shape of cutter and diameter of stock all affect
the load on the motor. Follow the suggested speed
charts, and if the motor sounds overloaded, take
smaller cuts. Most importantly of all, just use
COMMON SENSE!

Storing your machines and accessories
Your machine should be cleaned and lubricated
before it is put away. It should be kept covered to
keep dust and grit off the working parts. Sherline
sells fitted vinyl covers for each machine which look
and work great, but any type of cover will extend
the life of your machine. Accessories can be kept in
their original boxes or wrapped in cloth. They should
not be allowed to bang around against each other in
a drawer. This can cause them to collect dirt and
dents which will adversely affect their accuracy.
You can bet Rembrandt took good care of his paint
brushes. Miniature machine tools are also capable
of producing beautiful results when maintained
properly. If you expect to produce a masterpiece or

The motors on Sherline machines are thermally
protected. That means they have a built-in circuit
breaker that will shut down the motor if it gets too
hot. This keeps the motor from burning out. The
breaker will automatically reset as soon as the
motor cools and you can go back to cutting. If the
motor does shut down, immediately shut off the
power switch and back your tool out of the work.
The circuit breaker should reset in about 10 seconds.
108

just good, accurate parts, take care of your tools and
they won't let you down.

Transporting and carrying your machines
Never pick up a machine by its motor. The motor
on tbe lathe seems a particularly handy place to grab
it to pick it up, but it is mounted to the headstock
with a diecast part that ends up supporting all the
weight of the machine ... a task it was not designed
for. To carry or move a machine, it is best to have it
mounted to a base. Pick it up by the base rather than
by tbe machine itself.
Several people have gone so far as to mount a brass
carrying handle to each end of the machine's base
board. This is an excellent idea, particularly if you
cannot leave it permanently set up and must store it
each time you are done with it. The handles will
give you a better grip and assure the machine doesn' t
get dropped.

Parts are loaded on all four sides ofone pallet as a
another batch ofparts is being cut inside this CNC
machining center. Though the stakes are higher and
the sizes are bigger on a machine like this, good
maintenance is requiredfor machines ofany size to
produce good parts.

.. When I am working on (l problem. I never think abollt heallty.
I think only how 10 solve the problem. Bill when I havejinished.
if the sollllion is nol beauliflll. I know il is wyong ..
- Buckminister Fu ll er

109

This "grasshopper " aosshead steam engine was built by Jerry Kieffer. 11 is a 115 scale model ofanother
model of the engine by Roy Ozou/, a well known modeler. One of Jerry 's favorite challenges is laking
something that is already small and making it even smaller. A ladies wristwatch provides size scale.

To carry the engine,
Jerry made a tiny oak
finger jointed box
with sliding lid. Jerry
displays it at shows
by selling it atop a
pencil eraser to
provide scale.

Even .Jerry Kieffer admits tharhe is "pushing his limits " with this tiny
oscillating steam engine. It has two flywheels. 085" in diameter. The bore
is .029" and the stroke is .032" The intake and exhaust ports are .008"
and the whole engine weighs 3.5 grains (IIIJI oz.)
110

SECTION 2-UTHE OPERATIONS
Craftsman Profi le-Jerry Kieffer .
. ........ . ..... 112
I. Lathe workholding . ........... .. .. . ...... .. . ... 115
2. Lathe operating instructions . . ..... . ...• . .. ... . . .. 12 1
3. Tailstock tools and operations .... . .. . . .. . . . •.. . . . 141
4. Riser blocks ........... . . . ........ . . ... . . . .. . . 145

5. Supporti ng long or thin work ....... .. . . • . • . . . .. . . 149
6. Getting started in thread cutting ... ... .. • . ... . ..... 157
7. Knurled finishes ............ .. .. . ... . ..•. .. .... 167
8. Watch and clock making too ls .. ... .. . . . • . •• . . .... 171
9. Mi lling operations on a lathe ........ . .. . .. .• . .... 177

Under the glass watch crystal is a 1/30 scale. 114-20 threaded hex bolt and nul
along with a machined wrench to fit it. Nexl to it is afull size J14-20 bolt and nut
for comparison. To learn more about a man who takes miniature craftsmanship
to extremely small scale read the following profile on Jerry Kieffer.
III

Craftsman Profife by Craig libuse

JERRY KIEFFER•••Craftsmanship to the smallest detail
(Left) Jerry's Corliss

Project: 1/30 Scale Corliss steam engine

steam engine is done
in 1I30lh seale... down
to the smallest 114-20
bolt! II nms as well as
it looks.

.. ,

(Above) This "banjo
oiler ·· is typical ofthe

model's detail.

J

erry Kieffer is not a professional machinist. He is
a marketing representative for a utility company
in Wisconsin. In fact, less than 10 years ago he had
just about no experience with miniature machine
tools at all. But he is an excellent craftsman who is
good with any kind of tool and loves to make very
small projects, so getting his hands on precision
miniature machine tools opened up a whole new
world of enjoyment for him.

His interests are wide ranging ... from repairing
watches and guns to making miniature engines and
tools. Jerry delights in making incredibly small parts.
Some of them can only be appreciated through a
magnifying glass. If a friend makes a steam engine
in the smallest scale possible, Jerry will make a half
size model of his friend ' s model! He spends several
hours each evening in his shop and the amount and
quality of the work he has produced is truly
amazing, especially when you consider the level of
perfection to which it is done.
When Joe began making Sherline tools, Jerry is
exactly the customer he had in mind. He uses
inexpensive but accurate tools to make projects of
great detail and beauty. For anyone who asks, "are
tabletop machine tools accurate enough for what I
want to do?" , we simply pull out pictures of Jerry's
work. Nothing more needs to be said.
112

Jerry's shop is neal and simple. The magnifying loop
on his glasses is necessary for working on andfitling
the minuscule parIs he enjoys making.

A "monkey
wrench " in 117
scale.

.... I'l1010101 .......... '" ITlOIIwa""''''''' IOnD

Project: Miniature Spark Plugs

This running Stover "hil 'n miss " engine is built in
1/6 scale and has a //2" cylinder bore. Though it
may not look iI, Jerry says this is one of the most
difficult projects he has completed to date.

These working spark plugs arefrom top to bottom:
a //4 scale Rem 775 ~park intensifier plug, a //6
scale Champion "33" plug and a //4 scale
Champion primer plug.

Project: Miniature nut and bolt

Project: Harley Davidson Cylinders

I\
I
I

•
I

This is the one that really blows people away! The
hex bolt has a. 0/0" shaft. The Ihreads are 354 T.P.1.
and .0005" deep. A hex nut is threaded onto it. Next
to the bolt is a wrench with milled contours.
Compare the bolt to the screw heads in the lady 's
wristwatch to the right which are the smallest
fasteners commercial/yavailable. Jerry says making
the nuts and bolts is em,y once you have the taps
and dies ... iI was figuring out how to make the laps
and dies that was the hard part.

Anyone who knows Harley.\· will recognize these
righl away. These cylinders for a 1/6 scale /947
Harley Davidson "knucklehead " motorcycle were
built to test the feasibility of a proj(!ct 10 build a
complete scale motorcycle that will nOI only run,
but will "sound like a Harley" when it does. Jerry
also plans to build a "repealer watch "from scratch.
His goals are as big as his paris are small, although
f don't have the slighlest doubt that ifhe decides to
take on a challenge, he will find a way to do it.
t 13

AFlying Pendulum Clock by Jerry KieHer
--.---~

Glass or plastic domes
are a good way to protect
your project. This is a
traditional way to di~play
clocks where fh e works
are to be exposed.

This is a variation of the " Ignatz" clock. It is called
a "flying pendulum" clock because the ball on the

Jerry made this nicely displayed set ofstaking fools
to make it easier to press shafts and pillS into gears.

string wraps around first one post and then swings a
pivot 180 0 to wrap the string around the other post,
then back again. It is powered by a key-wound main
spring. Although this type of clock doesn't keep very
good time (accurate to within about 10 minutes a
day), it is fun to display because people are always
fascinated by its unique movement.

As a future project I would like to produce a kit
with plans and materials so that others can make
Ihis clock. It will include a video showing Jerry
Kieffer building it so you can see not only the steps
invo lved, but also how a superb craftsman plans and

executes a job.
Mainspring,
barrel, key
and
components
of the
winding
mechanism.
This is one ofJerry's setups usillg the mill and aile
ofhis special staking tools to press-jit the pins which
act as gear teeth on the third pinioll gear.
114

SECTION 2-lathe Operation

(hapter 1- Lathe workholding
CHUCKS

you use to clamp a part in a chuck can have a
profound effect on how true it runs.

For holding work on a lathe you have the obvious
cho ice of using a 3-jaw or 4-jaw chuck. Sherline
also offers a se lf-centering 4-jaw chuck and an
assortment of collets. There is a safe limit to how
much these chucks can be tightened without
damaging them. If the " tommy bars" are being bent
while tightening a chuck and the work is still
coming loose yOll have a problem that can't be
solved by tightening the chuck to its breaking point.
A 3-jaw chuck is really designed to hold only round
work. It has the advantage of being able to clamp
material that is not perfectly round with the principle
being the same as a three legged stool. Remember,
if the stock isn't perfectly round it would be
impossible to have it tum perfectly true. The method

Clamping up work in the chuck
With any clamping device, you shou ld spin the work
with your fingers as it is tightened. The part should
feel as though it is being held secure ly before the
final tightening is done. Don ' t insert the work into
the chuck 'until the jaws have been adjusted to their
approximate position. This keeps the work, or tool
in the case of a drill bit, from getting caught
between two of the three jaws. This is especially
true for the expensive chucks that have Ihe jaws
rotate as they are lightened. I don ' l like them
because of thi s fact, and the extra cost 10 have a
chuck run .00 I" or .002" truer just doesn ' l seem like
a good investment for the home machinist.

3-jaw, 4-jaw and tailstock chucks of various sizes for use on Sherline tools or any tool with a 3/4-/6
spindle nose thread. Other threads are available 10 allow the chucks 10 be used on some Unimat, Sears and
Cowells lathes. Arbors are also available 10 adapt them for use on watchmakers lathes. The 2.5" 3-jaw
chuck in the middle of the boltom row is shown with its jaws reversedfor holding larger work.
t 15

Factors affecting chuck llrunoutn
The chuck should run within .003 T.I.R. (Total
Indicated Runout). This is the amount of variation
an indicator would read if the work were rotated
with the spindle. Getting a chuck to run perfectly
true is difficult to accomplish because so many
things come into play. The threads have to be true
and clean along with the shoulder against which the
chuck seats. If a part is accidentally ripped out of
the chuck during machining both the spindle and
the chuck can be damaged.

Standud

~chMruk ~w

The design of Sherline 3· and 4.jaw chucles

III
1st

The 3-jaw self centering chuck is the most popular
of all the accessories available for the Sherline lathe.
It is available in both 2.5" diameter and 3.1"
diameter. These chucks will grip round or hexagonal
work quickly since the jaws move simultaneously
to automatically center the work being held. The
jaws on the chuck are designed so that the same
chuck can be used for both internal and external
gripping. Jaws are reversible for holding larger
diameter work. Due to the nature of the design ofa
3-jaw chuck, it cannot be expected to run perfectly
true. Even 3-jaw chucks costing five times more than
the one made for this lathe will have .002" to .003"
ronout. I f perfect accuracy is desired in a particular
operation, the use of a 4-jawchuck is recommended.
Each jaw is adjusted independently so parts can be
centered with total precision. Both a 2.5" and 3.1"
4-jaw chuck are available for the Sherline lathe. A
self-centering 4-jaw chuck is also available.

2nd

lid

Three-Jaw Chuck, standard jaw locations.

the normal position. The 3.1" chuck handles stock
up to 1-1 /2" (38mm) in diameter. For larger diameter
work, the jaws must be reversed. (See photo on
previous page.) The reversible jaws can grip to
2·1 /4" (56.0 mm) for the 2.5" chuck and up to 2.75"
(70 mm) for the 3.1" chuck. The chucks have a .687"
(17mm) diameter through hole with a 3/4·16 thread.

Precautions when using a chuck
NOTE: DO NOT TURN THE LA THE SPINDLE
ON UNTIL THE CHUCK IS TIGHTENED. The
acceleration of the spindle can cause the scroll to
open the chuck jaws if not tightened!
To prevent permanent damage, a 3-jawchuck should
only be used to hold finished, turned or drawn stock.
For rough castings, etc., use the 4-jaw chuck.
DO NOT OVERTIGHTEN THE CHUCK. Use only
moderate pressure with the Tommy Bars supplied.

Capacities of the 3·Jaw chuck
3-jaw chucks provide the quickest and easiest way
of holding work in the lathe. The Sherline 3-jaw
chuck is designed so that it can be used to clamp
externally on bar stock or internally on tube stock.
The 2.5" chuck is designed to grip from 3/32" (2mm)
to 1-3/16" (30mm) diameter stock with the jaws in

Reversing the chuck jaws on a 3·jaw chuck
Always start with position "A". (See illustrations
above and on next page.) To reverse the chuck jaws,
rolate the knurled scroll until the jaws can be
removed. They can be easily identified by the
location of the teeth to the end of the jaw. To
maintain chuck accuracy, the 2nd jaw must always
be inserted in the same slot even when the jaws are
reversed. This slot was identified by a punch mark
next to the slot. Newer chucks are engraved with
the letters A, Band C as shown. Always insert the
jaws in the order and at the location shown on the
drawings. Turn the scroll counterclockwise when
viewed from the face of the chuck until the outside
start of the scroll thread is just ready to pass the slot
for the 1st jaw. Slide the 1st jaw as far as possible
into the slot. Tum the scroll until the 1st jaw is
engaged.

The Sherline 3-jaw chuck with 2 tommy bars for
tightening the jaws to hold a workpiece.
116

Jaw Location

R._nlecI

J •• kbatffl...uc...

A 4-jawchuck and hex key used to tighlen eachjaw
individually. Individual jaw adjustment takes a bil
longer bUI allows perfeci centering of a pari.

Reversing the Chuck Jaws.
Due to the close tolerances between the slot and jaw,
the most difficult part of replacing the jaws is
engaging the scroll thread and 1stjaw tooth without
binding. Therefore, never use force when replacing
the jaws, and if binding occurs, back up the scroll
slightly and wiggle the jaw until it is free to move
in the slot. Advance the scroll and repeat for the
2nd and 3rd jaws. The scroll thread must engage
the first tooth in the I st, 2nd and 3rd jaws in order.

Using a 4-jaw chuck

Replacement jaws and chuck repairs
A set of replacement jaws is available. Should it
become necessary, you should return your chuck to
the factory so that they can replace the jaws and
check the alignment before returning it to you. In
the case ofa damaged chuck body, replacement of
the entire chuck is usually more economical than
attempting repairs.

Because of the varied uses of the 4-jaw chuck it
would be impossible to write a comprehensive set
of safety rules to cover every specific use other than
simply suggesting the use of liberal amounts of
"Common Sense". If you are not sure of your setup,
it probably isn't good enough. If possible, get a
machinist with more experience to advise you on a
safe setup. Be sure to remove the chuck key
before turning the spindle on. Work safely!
The screws that move the jaws are 20 T.P.I. (threads
per inch). A complete revolution is .050". If you
keep this number in mind when indicating a part in,
it can speed up the process.
First, use the lines machined on the face of the chuck
to roughly align the part concentric with the chuck.
Rotate the spindle and read the runout with a dial
indicator. Move the jaw closest to the high or low
point 30% of the total indicator reading in the proper
direction. I recommend the 30% figure because the
high point of a part will very seldom line up with a
jaw. Moving a jaw too much can cause "chasi ng
your tail" or simply moving the high point around
the chuck.

EXAMPLE:
The indicator shows a .030" runout. 30% of .030" is
approximately .0 10" . If one revolution of the jaw
feed screw is .050", then a little less than a 1/4 tum
will be .0 I 0". Back the jaw out this amount and
tighten the opposite jaw. DO NOT tighten the jaws
beyond "snug" until the part is running within .005"
T.I.R. Repeat this process until the part runs withi n
your specifications. Once the part is running within

A part is shown held in a 3-jaw chuck. The 3-jaw
chuck is easy to use and is the single most popular
accessory for Sherline tools.
117

the width of the jaw you're replacing carefully with
a micrometer (it is usually .312- .315"), and provide
that dimension when you order a replacement so
they can send you one that will fit properly. At the
factory, chucks are hand assembled and jaws are
custom fitted to each one to provide the best possible

fit.

A 4-jaw chuck c:an hold work ofjust about any shape
because the jaws adjust independently. It allowsfor
perfect centering or off-center part placement.

.002" T.I.R. it can usually be "brought in" by a final
tightening of the jaws. It should also be noted that
the chuck jaws are ground with a slight angle to
allow the jaws to apply equal pressure to the tip and
base when properly tightened. This angle amounts
to less than .001" on the jaw surface.

The self-centering 4-jaw chuck centers square work
qUickly. It also offers an additional gripping surface
to spread out the forces when gripping thin tubing.
Because the jaws do not adjust independently, the
work must be perfectly round or square for all the
jaws to grip at once.

The 4.jaw self.centering chuck
This chuck combines the ease-of-use advantages of
the 3-jaw chuck with some of the advantages of a
4-jaw chuck. It will automatically center square or
round stock; however, the stock must be accurately
shaped for all four jaws to grip. It will also grip thin
wall tubing in four places rather than three, which
spreads out the load and allows more grip without
crushing the tubing. Because the jaws can't be
adjusted independently, the centering accur<!cy is
similar to that of a 3-jaw chuck. While not as
accurate as an independent jaw 4-jaw chuck, it is
quick and easy to use if you need a little more
gripping power than the 3-jaw offers or if you often
work with round, square or octagonal stock.

When reversing the jaws, be sure not to force ajaw
onto the guide rails with the screw. "Wiggle" the
jaw as the screw is advanced until the jaw moves in
unison with the screw without binding.
Ifan off balance part has to be run, be sure to tum
the motor on at a low RPM setting and bring the
speed up slowly. Never go past the point where the
machine starts to vibrate.

4-Jaw opening ranges
The 3.125" 4-jaw chuck opens from 3/32" (2mm)
to 1-1/2" (38mm) in standard position and up to
2-3/4" (70mm) with the jaws reversed. The 2.5"
4-jaw chuck opens from 3/32" to 1-3/16" (30mm)
standard and to 2-1 / 4" (56mm) with the jaws
reversed. Both chucks have a .687" (17mm) through
hole with a 3/4-16 thread.
Replacing worn or damaged jaws on a 4-jaw chuck
Should the chuck jaws ever become worn or
damaged, I recommend you return your chuck to
the factory where they will replace the jaws and
assure that the chuck is adjusted within tolerances.
If the chuck body is damaged, replacement of the
entire chuck is usually more economical than
attempting to repair the body. If you wish to attempt
the replacement of a jaw or ja~s yourself, measure

Reversing the chuck jaws on the
4-jaw self.centering chuck
The jaws are removed by turning the scroll
clockwise (when seen from the front) to back the
jaws out. Each jaw has a slightly different thread
engagement pattern on the bottom, so they must be
reinstalled in the correct order. The instructions that
come with the chuck give detailed diagrams on how
to do this, but briefly the reversed jaws are installed
with jaws 1 and 3 swapped in position. They are
installed in the order 4-3-2-1. When reinstalling in
118

nonnal position, the order is 1-2-3-4. To keep the
chuck accurate, the fits must be pretty tight, so you
may have to wiggle the scroll a little as the first tooth
of each jaw is started to keep the jaw from binding.

Using a chuck with a live center
To hold work properly I try to provide as much
support as possible for the part by using a chuck at
one end and a live center at the other. The chuck
takes care of the torsional and spindle loads while
the center supports the other end and keeps it from
"whipping". A "dead" center can also be used, but
the live center requires no lubrication.

on a faceplate is usually being held in this manner
because it can't be held any other way. Many times
the faceplate will be out of balance when the work
is attached to it. The deciding factor in your setup
should be vibration. An out-of-balance part can have
centrifugal forces build up and send the part nying
if it is turned too fast. Sneak up on it. Faceplates are
also used to drive a lathe "dog" which is another
way to turn long slock between centers. (See page
126 for an illustration of a long part held between
centers using a faceplate and drive dog.)

WWCOLLETS

THE FACEPLATE

FACEPLATE

-1+

A faceplate can be used to bolt and glue parts to.
They don't cost much on a Sherline and can be
turned into special holding devices. A light face cut
may be required to "true" up the plate. Work held

...""_ ........

Parts can be bolted or glued directly to afaceplate
to work on them. Faceplates are inexpensive enough
to be considered "expendable" and can be drilled
or machined to hold work for a particular setup.
Here brass blanks are mounted to faceplates to be
turned into model car wheels as shown at the bottom.

A lathe collet set includes a drawbar (left). an
adapter (center, top), a knockout bar (right) and
assorted sizes of coliets (cen ter, middle).

Collets are a quick, easy metliod of mounting
cylindrical parts or bar stock in the lathe with a great
deal of centering accuracy. Each collet is actually a
small precision 3-jaw chuck whic h fits into a
special adapter which is held in the headstock. A
drawbar passes through the headstock and threads
onto the back side of the collet to draw it tightly
into the tapered adapter. The adapter causes the jaws
of the collet to close down, gripping the part to be
machined. Typically collets provide a very accurate
part mounting system, but each size of coll et can
accommodate only a small range of diameters of
approximately ±.OO I" (.02mm). Sherline tools use
a "WW" size collet which was developed by
watclunakers. WW collets differ from milling collets
in that they have a hole clear through the collet and
drawbar while milling collets do not. This allows
long material ofa diameter up to 3/16" (4.Smm) to
pass entirely through the collet. WW collets larger
than this diameter are sometimes referred to as "pot"
or "step" collets.

119

parts only on the face end. The maximum gripping
depth is about 3116" (4.8mm). Sherline olTers pot
chucks in three diameters: 3/4" , 1" and J-114".

Collet pot chucks come in various sizes. The dowel
pins at the right are inserted into the center hole
and clamped down on while the pot chuck is bored
to the size required for the job. Parts are held on
the face only; that is, they don't go through the pot
chuck as they do in regular collets.

Blank WW (allels
In order to make it easier for you to machine a WW
collet to suit your own custom purposes, Sherline
offers a WW collet blank. The end is tapered and
threaded to fit the collet adapter, but the gripping
end is left as a simple I" diameter blank for you to
tum to whatever shape you need. It has no center
hole or slots, so you may prepare it however you
like.

(ollel Pol (hucks
These collets are designed to hold larger or odd
shaped pieces. They arc inserted in the collet adapter
and drawn down on a 1/8" dowel pin. Then a lip is
turned to the exact size needed to grip your special
part. The dowel pin is removed and the pot chuck is
retightened with the part in place. Since there is no
hole through a pot chuck, they are designed to hold

Here is a setup devised by Pete Weiss to machine
the crankshaft for a running 1/6 scale Porsche air
cooled engine he is building.

(Above) A pOI chuck is being turned 10 the proper
inside diameter to grip a particular diameler part.

A pari held in a pot
chuck for machining.
Pot chucks allow you
fo quickly hold a
nllmber ofsame-sized
parts. The flat bottom
helps square them up
and sels the depth.

A carburetor and air inlet tubes for Pete Weiss'
miniature Porsche engine project.
120

SEaION 2-lolhe Operolion

Chapter 2-Lathe operating instrudions
SPEED ADJUSTMENT KNOB

BED

SPEED ~~~TROI "ASSEMBlY

r----- TAILST KCHUC
OC
K
wI # 0 Morse A
rbor

HEADSTOCK

,------ TAILSTOCKSPINDlE
SPINDlE lOCK GSCREW
IN
CROSSlIDE

--==

TAll5TOCK FEED

HEADSTOCK _ _
SPINDlE
"V" BElT

2-SPEED
STEPPED PUUIY
HEADSTOCK
lOCKING SCREW

=---

TA1L5TOCK

lOCKING
SCREW

EATHE
FACEPlATE
HEX K
EYS
TOMMYBARS
(for lightening (huck)

DEAD CENTERS

CHUCKK
EY

CROSSUDE FEED

SADDlE NUT
ADJUSTMENT

HANDWHEEL

SCREWS

B
ASE

UADSCREW
HANDWHEEl

FIGURE I-Parts of a miniature lathe.

Taking an initiol test cut

screw up one of these simple operations along the
way. Before starting on a part, come up with a plan
on how you are going to hold the work and how
you are going to measure or check the part for size
along the way. As I constantly try to remind you,
the only shortcut to producing good part s is to
remember this rule: "There aren't any shortcuts".

Near the end of thi s chapter is a section that will
walk you through taking an initial lest cut on your
lathe. Once you have read through this chapter, use
the example provided in that section to gel to know
your machine and to get a feel for CUlling metal.
The adjustments and procedures mentioned in these
instructions wi ll become much more real once you
have made some chips.

For examp le , if you attempt to ma c hine an
unsupported shaft, the cutter cou ld di g in and not
only ruin your work, it cou ld also take the chuck
with it. The choices you have to hold your work
piece are limited to holding the work between
centers, with a 3- or 4-jaw chuck, on a faceplale or
with a collet. When the work is held with a chuck or
collet it usually has to be supported at the other end
with the tail stock or steady rest. If the work is being
turned at high speed and a center is required , a live
center should be used rather than one that does not
rotate with the part.

Holding the work piece
The main difference between working with metals
and working with wood or s imilar easy-to-cut
materials is how you have to hold metal to cut, shape
and form it. Metal has to be held very securely in
order to work with it. Machining is a series of simple
operations that doesn' t allow for errors. The most
common error made by a novice is not taking the
time to hold a part properly. A lathe is a simple
device that can make very complex parts if you don ' t
121

where electrical hookups were rarely available. He
had built a treadle powered lathe using a wooden
frame, a motorless Sherline lathe and parts from a
10-speed bicycle. He had rediscovered the missing
link between bow power and water power; that is,
treadle power, which was also a way of turning
between centers. (I suspect that part of the success
of his product is not only the beautiful wood and
workmanship of the pens, but also that the customers
enjoy watching the pens being made right in front
of them on such an interesting tool.)

,-

(

,I
,
I

'/"

/

,
, ./

,"
1

...

<.

i~ \ ~ ''"
.
, r('

,\

~

"

(~ ;"~
'I
'(~

.-=]9'

:,~

'K '

..--' "-1-: ,

,

,
~,

/

b:'!: ~~' \;\~
/

~~,

'I
'-l.<.....
~
-...,,",, - I
"FIGURE 2- Turning between centers with a

\ \'-.::

t (~

faceplate and drive dog.
Turning between centen
I remember a documentary on India I saw when I
was a boy. and what fascinated me was a craftsman
turning and shaping wooden table legs. The table

legs were held between centers on a lathe constructed
of wood . The work was driven with a bow, similar

to a violin bow, that had a couple ofloops ofleather
wrapped around the work. By moving the bow back
and forth the work would tum. The bow had to be
long enough to get more than a few revolutions per
stroke which meant the operator couldn't get too
close to the work and still have the required throw.
This problem was overcome by working and
controlling the cutting tool with his toes and a simple
support. Think about it. Not only did he have to
operate the tool with his toes, he had to time his
cuts to when the work was turning in the correct
direction whi le moving the bow back and forth.
Despite the difficulty of the method and the
crudeness of the tools, the work this gentleman
turned out looked good by loday 's standards. This
has to be how turning started. I' m sure the really
good craftsman ended up with help to drive their
machines. We have gone from human power to
water power to electric power to drive the work and
to computer power to control the tooL
I had a customer come in one day who makes the
lovely wooden bodied pens ihat have become so
popular in the ' 90's. He was looking for a few lathe
parts to build a new machine on which to make his
pens. When I found out what he was really doing I
gave him the parts he needed. He wanted to make
and sell these wooden pens at outdoor craft fairs

Chip Ivester and his "missing hnk" foot powered
lathefor wood turning. Some samples o/Chip 's work
can be seen on page 41.
The point I was trying to make was that turning
between centers is how lathe work started, but it
isn 't so common today. Usually work will be held
in a 3-jaw chuck and supported with a live center if
need be, but if you plan to make a lot of shafts you
may disagree with me on this point. Turning between
centers can be a very accurate way of working, and
it is the preferred method for 0.0. grinding. The
headstock centers supplied with most lathes aren't
hardened. This allows you to tum the center in place
perfectly true if this type of accuracy is required.
Center drills have a 60° angle on their point and are
used to create a hole that will fit the standard 60°
lathe centers. The straight section of a standard
center drill leaves a pocket for oils to lubricate the
center. Lathe centers are usually designed with a
Morse taper that is designated by a number from #0
to #7. It is based on a taper of about 5/8" per
122

fool. The shallow taper makes parts "stick" together,
and a tap is required to remove them. The Sherline
lathe uses a # 1 Morse taper in the headstock spindle
and a #0 Morse taper in the tailstock. If! had it to
do over again I would have used a #1 in the tailstock
also. Although the #0 looks to be the "right" size, it
isn't a very popular size. #2 and '#4 Morse tapers
are standard for full-size tool-making machines.

Using a Hdog" to drive the work
Of course there has to be some method of driving
the work once it has been suspended between
centers. This is accomplished by clamping a "dog"
to the work. Why they call it a dog I don't know,
but it is simply a device that clamps to the work and
has a leg coming out that engages loosely with a
slot in the fac eplate which turns or drives the work
between the centers in the headstock and tailstock.
The headstock center turns with the work; therefore
no heat is generated. Centers and their mating holes
must be free from debris in order to have parts that
run true. The maximum diameter that can be held
with the dog included with a Sherline lathe is 5/8"
(lSmm). (See Figure 2.) Drive dogs are easy to
make, and any method that works is a good one. If
the part is going to run at higher RPM , some
consideration must be given to balance. This method
oftuming is ideal for bar work ortuming steps on a
bar. If the headstock or tailstock are purposely
misaligned, a taper will be generated. The dog then
becomes a U-joint to drive the work at an angle to
the spindle. Shallow tapers are usually produced using

this method. (See Figure 8) The tailstock center must
be greased to prevent overheating. An optional "live
center", such as PIN 1191 , turning on ball bearings
is the solution preferred by most machinists.
The headstock spindle has a Morse # I taper in the
spindle nose. The spindle thread is 3/4-16 T.P.1.
Accessories held in the spindle using the Morse # I
taper on a Sherline usually have a drawbolt for
additional holding power and can be removed by
loosening the bolt a few turns and tapping on the
head ofthe bolt lightly with a hammer or hard mallet.
Centers can be removed with the use of a knockout
rod (not supplied) approximately 3/8" in diameter
and 6" long. The bar is inserted through the back of
the spindle, and centers and other accessories can
be removed with a few light taps. The tailstock
spindle is equipped with a Morse #0 taper, and
accessories such as drill chucks and centers can be
removed by turning the handwheel counterclockwise
until the accessory is ejected.

Clamping parts in chucks
In order to have the work tum as lrue as possible it
must be carefully clamped in chucks or collets. The
material should be clean and have a smooth enough
surface so it can't damage the chuck jaws or the
collet. As 3-jaw chucks and collets are tightened,
the part should be spun in Ihe chuck jaws to allow
the chuckjaws to seat properly before they are fully
tightened. Don 't overtighten chucks. An improperly
supported part can't be machined by overtightening
a work-holding device. Two wrongs will not equal
a right. Read Chapter I in this section on workholding devices. Don'l tum the lathe on without the

/ ~<
FIGURE 3-Holding a round workpiece in a 3-jaw
chuck.

FIGURE 4- Holding a square workpiece in a 4jaw chuck.
12l

jaws being tight or the scroll may back the jaws out
as the spindle accelerates.

B

HEIGHT GAUGE
NOTE, Upper posilon is fOf
PIN 3009l1~~~ 10011 held in Illended 1001
poll ultd with liser bl«kl

A

CEHlER

r--'-------.J'---,

,.lriI.:l..l.-__l..,

FIGURE 5- Leveling the tool using (AJ the tip ofa
head- or tailstock center or (8) Sherline 's tool height
gage.
leveling the cuHing tool
Each type of turning work requires the correct tool
for the job. It is important that the cutting tool is
sharp and correctly set up in the tool post. The
cutting edge of the tool should be level with or a
few thousandths (0.004" or .01 mm maximum)
below the center height of the lathe. Check this
against either the headstock center or tailstock
cen ter. Sherline also manufactures a simple tool
height adjustment gage which allows you to check
tool height at any time by measuring from the table
surface. For another method machinists use to check
tool tip height, see Figure 22 on page 137.
The standard Sherline tool post is designed to hold
common 1/4" square tool bits which have had a few
thousandths of an inch (.0 lmm) ground off the top
edge for sharpening. Loosen the hold-down bolt and
slide the tool post as close to the center as possible.
The tip of the tool bit may be raised or lowered by
sliding a shim undernt.ath it. Thin metal shim stock
can be used for this purpose. If you don't have any
metal thin enough, a single thickness of paper
business card stock will usually do the job. Do not
use more than one thickness as it will compress too
much. (A rocker tool post is available which allows
this adjustment to be made without shims.) Ensure
that the tool is fixed securely in position by firmly
tightening the socket head screws but do not
overtighten. To minimize tool deflection, try not to
have the tool cutting edge protruding more than
3/8" (IOmm) from the tool post.

(enter drilling
Because the work turns and the drill does not on a
lathe, it is necessary to use a center drill before a
standard drill can be used. Due to the flexibility ofa

standard drill bit, it will tend to wander on the surface
of the rotating work, whereas a center drill is
designed to seek the center and begin drilling. If the
center drill is being used for a starting hole for a
drill, the largest diameter created should be larger
than the following drill diameter. This gives the drill
a machined surface to start on. If the center drilled
hole were undersize, the lip of the drill could be
forced to start off center by coming in to a surface
that isn't perfectly flat or catch a burr created by the
center drill. Cutting oil is recommended for all
drilling operations. A center drill should be
withdrawn, cleared of chips and oiled several times
during the drilling of a hole to keep the tip from
breaking off. Read more about center drills in the
cutting tool section on page 65. Also found there is
a chart of commonly available center drill sizes.

Tailstock drilling
Hold the work in a 3- or4-jaw chuck. If the work is
longer than approximately 3" (76mm), support the
free end with a steady rest. Fit the drill chuck to the
tailstock with a #0 Morse arbor and secure a center
drill in the tailstock chuck with the chuck key. Drill
chucks can't be tightened sufficiently by hand.
Adjust the tailstock to bring the center drill close to
the work and lock it in position. Be sure you have
enough available spindle travel so the tailstock will
not eject the chuck while it is in close proximity to
the work which may be turning. Tum the tailstock
handwheel to bring the center drill forward. After
the hole is started with the center drill, switch to a

FIGURE 6- Tailstock center drilling. The work
turns while the drill is held stationary in the tai/stock.
124

standard drill bit of the desired size to drill the hole.
When using drills on a production machine, a hole
can be drilled to three times the drill's diameter and
then it should be retracted, cleared of chips and more
lubricant applied. On a manual machine, the first
drilled depth shouldn't go more than two times the
drill's diameter. From then on, clear chips and
lubricate everyone times the diameter. (For
example: On a 1/8" drill you would drillli4", retract
and lubricate. Then you would retract and lubricate
at every 1/8" of depth you drill.) The reason for this
is that chips clog up the flutes and cause heat to be
generated. This burns the oi l out of the hole, usually
damaging both the drill and the part. Remember this
simple rule for applying lubricant, use the chuck key
for tightening, and you' ll be amazed how long yoUr
drills will las!.
The easiest way to center drill the end of a round
shaft which has a diameter too large to be put through
the spindle is to hold it in a chuck and support the
other end with a steady rest (PIN 1074) while the
end is being drilled. If this isn't possible, find the
center with a centering square, prick punch a mark
and center drill by hand. (For more details on using
a steady rest, see page 149.)
I have never had good luck in using progressively
larger drills to open up holes to a larger diameter.
The problem is concentricity, because the drill wants
to feed in too fast. In fact, drilling a second diameter
in brass can be dangerous, for it can pull the drill
into the existing hole as if the drill were a screw.
This can pull the drill chuck and arbor out of the
taper and when the drill starts turning with the
spindle, the drill breaks off and the drill chuck with
a sharp, broken drill sticking out of it goes flying by
your head. Been there, done that.

FIGURE 7- Headstock drilling. The drilllllrns in
the headslock spindle while the work is held
slationary.
the drawbolt a couple of turns. Give a light tap on
the bolt head with a hammer or hard mallet to break
the drill chuck arbor loose from the sp indle taper
before completely removing the drawbolt.

Reaming
Reaming is used for holes requiring accuracy within
.0005" (.013mm). Very small boring too ls are not
satisfactory in deep holes because of their flexibility.
Reamers are available in any standard size but are
rather expensive and are generally not purchased to
do one-of-a-kind type work. Use them only when a
boring tool cannot be used because of the size or
depth of the hole. Because of their length, they
cannot always be used on a small lathe.
Reamers are used only to "clean up" the hole. To
make an accurate hole , the work is drilled
approximately .0 10" (.25mm) smaller than the
reamer size. The work should be slowly rotated and
the reamer slowly fed into the hole while applying
plenty of cutting oil. The reamer s hould be
frequently removed and cleared of chips.

Headstock drilling
On a Sherline lathe, the drill chuck comes with a #0
Morse arbor attached. This will fit the tailstock
spindle. To use the drill chuck with the headstock
you wi ll need to first change to the #1 Morse arbor
which is included with your lathe. To change
arbors, put the dri ll chuck key in its hole to give you
better purchase to grip the chuck while using a
wrench to remove the #0 arbor. Replace it with the
larger # 1 arbor. Put the drill chuck in the headstock.
Then put the drawbolt with its washer through
the s pindle hole from the other end of the
headstock and tighten the drawbolt. DO NOT
OVERTIGHTEN! To remove a Morse arbor, loosen

Faceplate turning
The faceplate has three slots which allow work to
be bolted to its surface. Flat work can be screwed
directly to the faceplate . Extra holes can be drilled
to suit odd-shaped work unsuitable for a chuck. If
the work is mounted off-center, be sure to
counterbalance the faceplate and use very low RPM.
Don't hesitate to drill holes in ormodify the faceplate
as needed to do a particular job. That's what they
are for. They are inexpensive and you can afford to
have several on hand which can be modified for special
jobs. For more on using a faceplate see page 119.
125

Taper turning

file. When set to the proper angle, retighten the set
screw against the pin to lock the headstock into
position. Short angles can also be formed when a
part is supported by a center with lathe tool clamped
at an appropriate angle and plunge cut in multiple
passes if needed.

On most lathes a shallow taper can be cut between
centers by offsetting the tailstock. On the Sherline
lathe this is done by re moving the headstock
alignment key and turning the headstock to any angle
away from dead center. To rotate the headstock, the
alignment key must first be removed. To do this,
loosen the set screw in the front of the headstock
and li ft the headstock and motor unit off the locating
pin. Tap the ali gnment key out of its slot on the
bottom of the headstock and replace the headstock
unit on the pin. While pressing down on the
headstock, rotate it to the ang le you desire by
referring to the angle scale on the bed. The base is
ca librated in 5° increments up to 45° both left and
right of dead center. (Keep in mind the calibrations
on the base have no meaning when cutting a taper
between ce nters. That taper must be establi shed by
trial and error.)
The lathe tool and crossl ide hand wheel can be used
to measure and mark off small movements when
offsetting the part. Bring the tool up to touch the
part and then loosen the headstock. Rotate the
headstock to move the part away from tbe tool and
advance tbe tooltbe desired amount of offset. Then
rotate the headstock and part back until it just toucbes
tbe tool and lock tbe headstock in place. Remember
also that the distance between centers gets shorter
as the angle is increased. Don't be ashamed to bring
a taper to final size with a good flat, single-cut mill

"

FIGUR E 9-Turnillg a taper 011 a short workpiece
held ill a chuck with the headstock rotated.
Short work can be beld in a 3- or 4-jaw chuck and
turned as shown in Figure 9. In this case, the
engraved angle markings on the lathe base can be
used. A greater degree of accuracy can be obtained
by measuring the angle between the face of the
headstock (the side that the spindle nose protrudes
from) and the edge of the crosslide. Remember that
the tool must be on center for these settings to work.
Tools set above or below center will cut less of an
angle than is set. If the headstock is angled towards
the front, the taper wi ll cut smaller at the right of
the part. This is the oppos ite of adjustments made
when turning a taper between centers. Tapers can
also be bored in the end of work held in the 3- or 4jaw chuck.

.

Taper turning or angle cuning with a compound slide

-.-

The redesigned (1998) compound slide is a third
method of turning a taper. The base of the slide is
attached to the crosslide table using four T-nuts. Line
up the edge of the base with the front edge of the
crosslide table or indicate it in to make su re it is
mounted square to the spindle. The locking screws
on the lock ring are loosened and the slide can then
be rotated using the laser engmved markings to select
the desired angle. The lock rin g screws are then
tightened. The large surface area of the lock ring

FIGURE 8- Long, shallow tapers can be cut in a
cOlltinuous pass by pivotillg the headstock to the
proper offset while supporting the other end with
the tai/stock. The work is driven by using a drive
dog ill the fa ceplate. The dog acts like a "universal
joifll" as the drive pill slides ill the faceplate slot to
accommodate the allgle of the offset.
126

FIGURE IV-The compound slide offers a different way to cut tapers on a lathe without removing the
alignmeru key and rotating the headstock. It can also be used to cut angled slots in long pieces or to bevel
the end of a part. Sherline:'1 compound slide is designed 10 be used on the "back" side of the part.

provides a lot of friction so it is easily locked into
position without overtightening the screws. The tool
is then advanced into the part by turning the
compound slide handwheel. The 114" cutling tool
can be mounted in grooves on either side or across
the front oflhe compound slide.

For more on the thought process that went into the
design of this accessory as well as how it led to the
design of a radius cutter, see page 132.

Turning slide handwheels to avoid tool morks
To produce a good finish on any machine tool
requires more effort than just "cranking the handles".
As I try to remind you all through this book, "metal
likes to be cut in a continuous fashion", and it is the
way you crank these handwheels that transmits this
information to the cutters. The first thing to
consider is whether the force of turning the
handwheel can affect the finish. The force I' m
referring to is that which is put into the hand wheel ,
yet is not directed towards actually rotating the
handwheel. Handwheel s that are mounted directl y
on a slid e ca n ca use thi s problem . Sherline
handwheels have a plastic handle for rapid cranking,

Cuffing on the IIback side of the port
ll

Notice that the compound slide is designed to be
used on the "back" side of the part. The 1/4" cutting
tool is mounted " upside down" so that the cutting
point is on the bottom when it is aligned with the
centerline of the part. This offers several advantages.
First, it moves the slide away from interference with
the crosslide hand wheel. Second, because of the
direction of part rotation there is less tendency for
the cutter to "chatter" when it is being lifted in the
slide rather than being pushed down toward the table .
127

FIGURE II- In this setup, the compound slide is suspended out from the table and a cut is being made
close to the chuck. The length ofthe part would have made this taper difficult to cut using the usual method
of offsetting the headstock.
128

but, in some cases, it is better to use your fingers to
tum the handwheel using the knurls on its outer edge
when feeding the tool. If a handwheel is cranked
rather than turned, the cranking action will be
transmitted to the slide it is mounted to, rotating it
but also pushing and pulling on it. The end result
would be the same as pushing and pulling on a slide
that is controlling the cutting tool. This will leave a
tool mark equal to the pitch of the leadscrew as you
crank through the cut. Tool marks that are only
1110,000" deep are still a visible and have to be
removed if perfection is your goal. The slides on a
Sherline lathe that are affected by this motion are
the crosslide and the compound slide. Both have
the handwheels mounted directly to the slide.

the end and/or sides except fonn tools which are
ground on the top surface.
NOTE: Because of the importance of a sharp and
properly ground tool to the cutting process, I have
included instructions on grinding your own lathe
tools in this book. Refer to page 77.
Cutting tools are ground to various shapes according
to their usage. Tools are usually ground to shape as
needed by the operator. Some standard tools are
described below:
NORMAL TURNING TOOLS-- This feeds from right to left,

is used to reduce work to the desired diameter and
is the most frequently used of all tools. When
working with full size lathes, roughing tool are used
that have less cutting angle than finishing tools. With
a miniature lathe, I don't use a differently shaped
tool for roughing. Full size machines may be putting
ten horsepower into a half-inch tool bit, but with a
Sherline lathe a tool with a 55° tip will work just
fine unless you have a lot of stainless steel to cut.

If you ever have the opportunity to watch a good
toolmaker using the compound on a lathe that is
older than he is, you will notice he controls the feed
rate with both hands. Look a littl e closer and it
becomes apparent that the hand wheel is being driven
by rotating the wrist, not cranking. By using both
hands, passing the handwheel from one hand to the
next, the hand wheel can be kept rotating at the same
speed without putting extraneous forces on the
machine slide.

Reference to Figure 13 will illustrate the lateral
positioning of this tool. Note the clearance behind
the point between the end of the tool and the work.
Insufficient clearance wi ll cause the tool to " rub"
and excessive clearance wi ll produce a poor quality
finish simi lar to a very fine thread due to the small
length of tool edge in contact with the work. These
" feed lines" become more pronounced with rapid
feed. To provide a smooth finish, the sharp cutting
point may be slightly rounded to a .010 radius or
flat on a grinder and cleaned up with an oilstone,
taking care to preserve the side clearance underneath
this comer.

Tool shapes and grinding your own tools
The shaping of cutting tools to suitable angles for
the type of material and nature of work being
performed can be very important to satisfactory
results. When tools become dull, gently re-grind and
preserve the original angles and shapes. Do not grind
the top face of the tools, but confine sharpening to

NORMAl TURNING TOOLS

This tool should not be advanced directly endwise
into the work. The depth of cut is set while the tool
is clear ofthe end of the work. The starting procedure
is to advance the tool until the point just touches the
work. Note the reading on the crosslide handwheel ,
withdraw the tool slightly and move along until clear
of the end of the work. Now advance the crosslide
to the above reading, add desired depth of cut and
then feed the tool along the work piece the desired
distance. Withdraw the tool clear ofthe work, having
noted the reading on the cross li de handwheel ,
mentally note the reading on the lead screw
hand wheel, return the tool to starting position and
advance to the previous reading plus the desired cut.

BORING TOOL

l(fT HAND

SIDE TOOL

INSIDE
THREADING TOOL

THREADING TOOL

PARTING TOOL

The second cut is now begun, stopping at the same
or less than the previous reading of the lead screw

FIGURE 12-Tool shapes
t29

NORMAL TOOL

5l1GHTlY,\
ROUNDED
CORNU

shape that is thin enough for use on a miniature lathe
is somewhat of a losing proposition. A 114" square
tool bit ground to a width a Sherline lathe can handle
will not be strong enough. Cutoff tools require a
special holder on all lathes and the Sherline is no
exception. The special holder allows the use of a
tool that is both strong and thin. The Sherline
parting tool uses a thin .040" (l mm) blade which
has a slightly thicker ridge at the top to accomplish
the same function of providing clearance for the tool
while cutting. Parting tools thicker than .040" (1 mm)
will be too wide for use on your Sherline lathe.
Instructions for use of the cutoff tool can be found
on page 75.

SlOE TOOLS

CLEARANCE

FIGURE 13- (Normal Tool and Side tools) Arrows
show direction of 100/ feed in all diagrams.
handwheel. The face of the end surface can later be
finished to length with a side tool. This procedure

enables a surface to be turned to accurate length.

CLEARANCE

Repeat the procedure until the work has been
reduced to within about .0tO" (O.2Smm) of desired
diameter, noting that each .0 IS" (O.4mm) increase
in depth of cut will reduce the work diameter by
twice this amount, or .030" (O.8mm), For the

finishing pass, advance the tool by the required

FIGURE 14- Boring tool clearance.

amount and feed along the work just far enough to
gauge the finished diameter. Adjust depth of cut if

BORING TOOLS- The lathe boring tool is used in the

toolpost on a lathe and ground from a square tool
bit. (Boring tools used in a mill have round shanks
and are used with an offsettable boring head to
enlarge holes in a work piece.)
Starting with a drilled hole, the tool is used to
enlarge it to the desired size. It may also be used to
enlarge the bore of a tube. The work must be
mounted in a chuck or on a faceplate and the boring
tool set as shown in Figure 15. Note the clearance
behind the cutting point as shown in Figure 14. A
tool shaped like this will allow you to finish the

necessary and complete the final pass using a SLOW
feed to obtain a smooth finish and exact size.
SIDE TOOLS-Whi Ie these may be, and often are, used
as general purpose turning tools, their specific use
is for facing the sides of collars and shoulders; that
is, finishing these to correct dimension and with a
smooth, flat surface. They are also for facing work
held on a faceplate or in a chuck. The facing of work
in this manner is very useful for the production of
truly flat surfaces and for producing articles to an
exact thickness. The two uses of the side tools are
illustrated in Figures 12 and 13. The sharp comer at
the cutting point should not be slightly rounded, as
may be done with the nonnal turning tool, as knife
tools may be required to produce sharp comers.
Note that a tool which is fed from left to right is
called a LEFT side tool. This is because the direction
the chip comes off(in this case to the left) detennines
what the tool is called. (See illustration and further
explanation on page 72.)
CUTOFF OR PARTING TOOLS- The conventional parting

tool is shaped like a dovetail when viewed from
above and is used to cut off work pieces by feeding
the end of the tool across the lathe bed and through
the work piece. Grinding a parting-off tool of this

FIGURE 15- A lathe boring tool in use.
130

bottom of the bored hole by feeding the tool towards
the center. The biggest problem you may encounter
grinding your own boring tools is not the tool
clearance, for the tool looks similar to any other lathe
cutting tool with the cutting tool clearance rounded
for the hole. The problem is the shank supporting
the cutting edge of the tool may drag on the bottom
back side of the tool. Many times the tool may have
been ground correctly but was then clamped at an
angle. If I'm boring a hole that has to be deep, I
will not bore the hole full depth until I get the
beginning of the bored hole enlarged to close to it's
final size. This will give the beginning of the shank
more clearance and allow you to grind a stronger
boring tool.
Withdraw the tool to allow turnings to escape from
the hole whenever necessary. Care should be taken
not to feed the tool beyond the depth required or to
feed so deeply as to damage the chuck or faceplate.
Where a hole must be bored right through the work,
the work should be located out from the faceplate
to provide clearance for the tool to feed through.
The leadscrew hand wheel graduations can be used
to indicate the correct depth at which to stop the
feed. Notice that with boring, the depth of cut is
increased by moving the tool and crosslide towards
the operator and not away as with normal turning.
The boring of holes often necessitates greater than
normal overhang of the tool from the tool post, so
the depth of cut and rate of feed should be reduced
from normal. Try to grind tools that are as strong as
possible.
FORM TOO~A custom contour can be ground into a
tool to produce a special shape like a radius in a
part. The width ofthe cutting edge must be less than
two and a halftimes the smallest diameter. Cutting
speed must be slow and constant to prevent chatter.
The clearances ground behind the cutting edges
indicate the type of material for which the tool may
be used and the direction in which it is fed along the
work. When grinding tool bits, correct clearances
are essential or "rubbing" can occur. For more on
form tools, see page 80.

•

FIGURE 16- An inserted tip tool in its holder. The
blue box contains additional replacement tips. In
the wooden box are various tools and tips.
life. Brazed carbide tools cut great but chip easily.
Inserted carbide cutting tools are the answer and
have replaced those other tools in the modern
machine shop. Carbide inserts have the ability to
consistently give good finishes and long tool life at
a much higher cutting speed. This is especially
important with small lathes because they do not have
excessive power at low RPM. With inserted carbide
tools, you can cut stainless steel at the same RPM
you were formerly using to cut aluminum with high
speed steel tools, yet there is no sacrifice in the
quality of the surface finish.
These tools are more expensive than high speed
steel; however, they are worth every penny if you
have problems grinding your own steel tools or are
cutting exotic materials like stainless steel.
Sherline offers a tool post (PIN 7600) which holds
the larger 3/8" diameter tool shanks used to hold
carbide or diamond inserted tips. It also has a 3/8"
round hole for boring tools. A good starting point
for a tool is the PIN 7615 right hand holder that uses
the PIN 7605 insert. This is a 55° insert good for turning,
facing and profiling. Also available are 80° inserts
which are slightly less versatile but offer longer tool
life because of their stronger, more square shape.
These tools should not be used to cut hardened steels
or piano wire. Materials such as those should be
ground to shape, not cut. However, abrasive
materials such as glass reinforced plastics can be
easily cut with these tools. For more information on
inserted tip carbide tools see page 73.

In.erted lip ,.,bidelool.
Inserted tip carbide tools allow the home shop
machinist to enter the space age, as these cutting
tools add a new dimension to small lathes. When
working with tough metals, high speed steel tools
need constant sharpening and have a relatively short
III

FIGURE

J 7- The

compound slide is mounted centered on the
crosslide, the tip of a properly mounted toolbit could
be as much as an inch away from the chuck. This
wasn't satisfactory because one of the biggest
problems using a small lathe was keeping the rough
stock as short as possible to help eliminate
"chatter". I planned to offset the compound on the
crosslide to get the tool closer. This had the
compound slide overhanging the crosslide more than
I liked. What allowed a setup like this to work was
the fact that cutting tools are less prone to chatter
when the cutting loads are directed up from the slide.
I learned this working with screw machines. Screw
machines have front and rear slides controlled by
cams, and if the slides were worn out you could get
better results putting the widest cutting tools on the
rear slide. The reason is that the tool is lifted rather
than "digging in" if the cutting load becomes too
great. We also make a rear mounted riser block for
the cutoff tool holder to take advantage of this fact.

T-resl allows metal to
be turned with a hand

held tool called a
"graver ". This is a
traditional method
still used today by
watch makers and
instrument makers .

Using a watchmaker's T"rest and gravers
Another method of removing metal is with a hand
held cutting tool called a "graver". It is rested on
and moved along a repositionable rest called a
T -rest. It is traditionally associated with clock and
watch makers using jeweler's lathes, but can be a
useful skill to anyone turning small, custom parts

because of its freehand versatility. World renowned
watch and clock maker, William R. Smith designed
Sherline's T-rest, and with it, your lathe becomes a

first class jeweler's lathe. Instructions on use of the

Locking ring idea changes direction of design

T -rest are included in Chapter 8 of this section.
Instructions on how to make your own gravers are
included with the purchase of a T-rest or may be
found on Sherline's web site.

The method used to lock the compound was the same
as I used to lock the rotary colwnn attachment which
we had just put into production. They both use a
locking ring. The large areas of the gripping

Designing the compound slide...
Proof your first design isn't always your best
The compound slide shown in this book wasn't the
first one I designed for the Sherline lathe. The first
one was a "turkey", but at the time I couldn't think
of a better way to do it and still keep the cost down.
To me the problem wasn't making a slide that was
strong enough to take the machining loads, it was
making a slide that wouldn't deform when the tool
bit was overtightened. I also had the problem of the
slide interfering with the crosslide handwheel.
Understanding its limitations, I was able to use it
with few problems, but many customers mentioned
that the accessory was a weak point in an othef'vise
excellent line. It took me a long time to realize that
the compound didn't have to be mounted on the front
side of the crossJide. Once I considered designing
one that would mount only on the back side the
concept became straightforward. Not having to leave
a large space for a tool to be mounted either right
side up or upside down meant the extra 114" taken
up by a spacer could now go into the tool holder,
making it both smaller and stronger.

r.-,/-'---_ COMPOUND NUT

IOTATING BoW

....

WEI ENGRAVED

.

~

t

LOCKING RING

,

The second problem was getting a cutting tool close
enough to the 3-jaw chuck to be useful. When the

FIGURE l8- The components of the redesigned
compound slide.
132

FIGURE 19- The radius cUlling allachment required some original thinking. Once you realize that lathe
tools don't necessarily have to move horizontally, coming up with a workable design was a lot easier.
mentioned. These are all simple designs, but they
are usually the most difficult to come up with. The
ultimate compliment to your design is when
someone calls your solution "obvious",

surfaces provide a lot 0(" friction and make for a very
secure lock that doesn't require much tightening
force be applied to the screws. My first attempt was
to use a T-nut in a T-slot. Machining a small T-slot
is a costly operation and I try to avoid it. T-nuts also
apply a lot offorce in a small area and overtightening
them can damage the slot. The locking ring is what
made it work. It is funny how one idea leads you to
another, and as I'm typing this I'm thinking about
making a rear slide cutoff holder to use with our
riser block to take advantage of the fact I just

Understanding your own market

To make a piece of tooling for use in my own shop
is easy, but to put an accessory like this into
production is a different matter. In order to produce
a product at a reasonable cost it must be produced
in quantities, and you t:nd up with thousands of
dollars in a product before the first one is sold. Small
133

manufacturers don ' t have the dollars for market
research , so you ha ve to know your customers.
Market research companies aren ' t any good at doing
research on specialized product lines for specialized
customers, and they can end up charging more for
the research than the profit that could be made on
the product itself. You have to go with your g ut
fee ling and consider what a customer is willing to
pay for such an accessory. The skill level required
lO use the product must also be considered, as a
product that requires a hi ghly skilled person to use
it also cuts down on the number of potential
customers.

learning a great deal about the subject narrows your
mind . One other thing that limits your thinking is
knowing that you have to be able to build what you
design. If you didn't know what the in side of a
machine shop looked like , you would design what
you wanted and let someone else worry about how
to make the parts. Unfortunately, products designed
in thi s fashion , thoug h c reative, are us ually too
expensive to be successful.

Having fun with new designs
The radius attachment will have very limited appeal
because it is a very spec ial tool. In fact, I will be
surprised if we sell over thirty units a year. I'm nO(
working to satisfy the needs of most of my customers
but rather the needs of a/l of my customers. I believe
it will widen the scope of what can be built with our
product line. At thi s stage of my business I have the
tremendous advantage of working on things because
they are interesting or just plain fun to work on. I
think about interesting devices that allow you to do
the " impossible" with tool s that can be stored in a
closet, and I have talented employees to put these
ideas into production usi ng a shop full of modern
CNC machine tools. The best is yet to come.

One invention leads to another... a radius (utter is bom
When I was testing the compound I noticed how
freely the slide would rotate with the locking screws
loose, and I cui a concave shape on a scrap piece of
bar stock by rotating the slide by hand. A few weeks
before, a c ustomer had ca lled wanting a radius
cutting attachment to make, of all things, prosthetic
eyeballs. I ended up putting a great deal of thought
into trying to design a compound that could also be
used to cut a radius. I had to give this idea up because
my new compound was rapidly becoming another
turkey, but my mind was still thinking about a radius
attachment. I had built several radius attachments
for customers ove r the years, but at that time I
couldn 't afford the time and money it would take to
put an accessory with such a limited appeal into
production. Things have changed now, and I realize
that what makes our product unique is the vast line
of unusual accessories we offer for our machines. I
became determined to add a rad iu s tool to our
product line.

" Imagillalioll is //l ore important

than knowledge. "
- Albert Eillstein

Knowing too much (an hamper the design process
I can't understand why I didn ' t think of it sooner.
For years I had been using a tool similar to the radius
attachment I e nded up making . It is a standard
method used to put a radiu s on a grinding wheel
with a diamond . A "swing" is suspended between
two ce nters and th e c utter is offset from the
centerline by the length of the radius you wish to
cuI. The tool can be mounted to cut both concave
and convex shapes. Again, what made the new
design difficult to visualize was that I had my mind
locked into believing the tool had to move in a
horizontal plane. Getting your mind to break free of
traditional methods is what makes designin g so
difficult . In order to see the need for new products,
you have lO know a great deal about the subject, but

---=- At the top is a real spark plug, below it is a 1/5
scale working model by Jerry Kieffer. Below is a
closer look at another small spark plug and its
components.

•

134

GUIDE TO APPROXIMATE TURNING SPEEDS
MATERIAL

(ur Speed 1/4" (6mm) 1/2" (13mm)I " (25mm)
S.F.M D
.
iameter
Diamefer Diameter

67
50
Stainless, 316
47
Sleel, 12114
174
Sleel, 1018
87
51 4130
eel,
82
Gray (ost Iron
57
A
luminum, 7075 400
A
luminum, 6061 375
Aluminum, 2024 268
Bross
400

Stainless, 303
Stainless, 304

1000 RPM
800
700
2600
1300
1250
900
2800
2800
2800
2800

500 RPM
400
350
1300
650
650
450
2800
2800
2000
2800

250 RPM
200
175
650
300
300
220
1400
1400
1000
1400

FIGURE 20-Turning speeds for high speed steel
clltting tools
Turning speeds
The chart above provides a guide to approximate
speeds at which work of differing materials should
be rotated. Note that the turning speed is inversely
proportional to the diameter ofthe work; that is, the
larger the diameter, the slower the RPM. Material
often differs in its hardness, so these figures may
have to be varied. The harder the material. the slower
the turning speed should be.
Keep in mind that, for the most part, turning speeds
are not too critical. Overly high speeds can generate
excessive heat and may also damage the tool's
cutting edge or cause it to "rub" instead of cutting.
Slower speeds than nonnal cause no hann, except
by increasing the time involved. Aluminum ,
however, usually gives a better finish turned at high
speed and lubricated. More infonnation on cutting
speeds can be found on page 102.

and binding. A press ure oil system keeps th e
bushing from "freezing up" . The cutting tools are
placed on machine sli des which allow them to be as
close as possible to the carbide bushing. This is
similar to a setup using a steady rest. The bar stock
is fed through the bushing whi le the tool cuts. The
feed rate is controlled by carns, and a single tool
can generate many shapes by using precision cams.
If the cutting tool were to be backed out as the
material was fed through the bushing a taper would
be cut.
What this has to do with turning small diameters on
a Sherline lathe you ask? The reason you can turn
these small diameters on a Swiss machine is that
the cutting loads are transferred to the bushing, and
the finished diameter is turned in a single pass. Of
course the geometry of the cutting tool must have
very little radius to keep forces from the diameter
that is being left. That is actually a pretty good
description of how these sma ll diameters are
produced. The part is simply what is left over from
the cut. (See photo on page 140.)
The Sherline and other standard lathes don't have a
bushing, and to overcome this problem we increase
the stock diameter to the point it can support itself.
There is a point of no return if the part is too long
for this method to work, and in this case a fo llower
rest may have to be employed. For small diameters
the tool has to be on exact centers. I wou ld always
make test cuts to establish dial settings ifmore than
one diameter is to be cut. The diameters are then
cut to length one at a time to complete the part. Small
parts will usually require a better finish than can be
machined with a cutting tool, so you must allow a
little extra material that wi ll be removed during
polishing. See Chapter 5 in this section fonn more
on supporting long, thin work.

Cuffing small diameters

Using the part itself as a mandrel

First we have to define what a small diameter is. I
would define it as a diameter that isn't rigid enough
to be machined. The work would deflect or bend
away ITom the tool rather than being cut. Watch parts
have shaft sizes with diameters as small as .006"
(.ISmm). The machines used to make these small
parts in production are called "Swiss automatics".
The difference between a standard lathe and a Swiss
automatic is the bar stock isn't clamped where it is
being machined. It is clamped by a collet that feeds
the bar through a carbide bushing. The bar stock
has to be held to exact diameters to eliminate slop

I used this trick in a different fash ion and got a
contract for thousands of dollars. The contract was
for some thi n walled aluminum tubes that had a
shape like a test tube. They had a diameter of 1. 125"
(28mm) and were about six inches long and had a
wall thickness of .040" (1 mm). The tube would
simply collapse and the theory was the part would
have to be placed on a mandrel to machine the fina l
00. I bought 1~ 7/ 16" diameter stock to do the job.
The center was drilled and reamed to size, and the
outside diameter was cut in a single pass. What was
left over was the part they wanted. The excess
135

,

.

.

,
"

'.

•

•

~ .

' .. If

.,

.',

'1

,

,

'.

,
FIGURE 2J- To get started, chuck up apiece a/round aluminum stock about 314" in diameter and gel
your cutting tool sel lO the right height.
material that was machined off was, in a sense, the
fixture that held the part while it was being
machined. Think about it. The cost in wasted
material was far less than the extra operation
required.

computer program by simply reading the
instructions. The same can be said for machining.
A word like "chatter" doesn ' t have much meaning
until a part is ripped out of a three-jaw chuck under
your nose. Metal doesn' t cut like wood, and not
many rules can be transposed from wood cutting to
metal cutting; however, the skills that you may have
developed using tools and building projects will be
invaluable. I have included a chapter on materials
and it should be read before you cut any metal. (See
Section I, Chapter 3.)

INITIAL TEST CUTTING ON ALATHE
GeHing a feel for cutting metal

Before going on, I believe you should develop a
sense of what cutting metal is all about. It will make
the instructions throughout the rest of this book far
more meaningful. As a hobbyist or even if you are
planning to make a career in machining that
includes using CNC machines, you must have full
knowledge of how metal cuts. The skills you learn
with manual machines will eventually have an
impact on how well your programs will work. It
would be next to impossible to learn a complex

Make your first culs in aluminum
Your first cuts should be on aluminum which has a
hardness of around T-6. Don't use brass. It is easy
to machine, but it has some strange characteristics
that could make you question the basic rules of
machining. When brass is machined the chips
"splinter" and it cuts similar to wood which isn't
136

TOOL TIP NEEDS TO GO

DOWN

TOOL TIP NEEDS TO GO

control all the way countercl ockwise and then tum
the motor on. Bring the speed up to approx imately
1000 RPM (about 1/3 speed). To establi sh too l
pos ition in relation to the work, bri ng the tool in
slowly until it just starts to scribe a line on the outside
diameter of the work.

UP

DIREOION OF MOVEMENT
DETERMINES WHICH WAY
TOOL TIP MUST MOVE
MOM MEASURING s"'>

--11

CumNG TOOL

Move the tool towards the tailstock until it clears the
end of the work. Advance the tool.OI0" (.25 mm) using
the crosslide handwheel ( 10 divisions on the inch
handwheel scale). Using the bed handwheeJ , move the
tool slow ly across the work toward the headstoc k. If
you didn't machine a smooth shinny finish take another
look at your tool. If it looks proper try a small amount
of cutting oil. Tools that are dull or have been set above
center will have an important effect on the finish. The
smaller the diameter, the more accurate the tool has to
be set on center.

PAIl
LATHE TABLE

FIGURE 22-Using a scale between the toof bit and
the part to check if the tool tip is on th e part
celllerJine.
the case for most materials. If you don't have a Sherline
lathe use whatever you have. These rules apply to all
lathes, and the way you apply them on machines Olher
than the Sherline will be up to you. Whatever machine
you are going to operate you must wear eye protection
and work safe ly!

Feed, speed and tool"chaHer"
Cutting tools used on lathes are des ig ned to remove
metal much as paper is removed from a roll. It takes
a positi ve feed rate to accomplish thi s. If the feed
rate isn' t fast enough, it would be simil ar to teari ng
an indi vidual sheet of paper off the roll. The results
when cutting metal would be shorter tool li fe, a poor
fi ni sh and tool "c hatter". Chatter is a function of
rigidity, but it also can be controlled by speed (RPM)
and feed rate. Since you already have a piece of
aluminum chucked up, experiment with speed and

Chucking your part and seHing the tool position
If you have never operated a lathe before, I suggest
that you make a trial cut on a scrap piece of round
material to learn the basic operation of a lathe. In a
3- or 4-jaw chuck, secure a piece of round aluminum
stock approxi mately 3/4" (20mm) in diameter and
1-1 /2" (40mm) long. Secure the presharpened 1/4"
square cutting tool supplied with the lathe in the
tool post, making sure that it is properl y positioned.
Thi s tool will be on ce nter because it has been
sharpened for use with the Sherline lathe. If you are
using a different brand of lathe, take the time to get
the point of the tool on center. Machini sts have a
simple trick to check the center height of lathe tools
using a 6" metal machinist's scale. Hold the scale in
a vertical position fl at against the outside di ameter
of the work. Now move the tool bit in and hold the
scale in pl ace with the tip of the tool, using only the
slightest pressure so the scale isn' t damaged. If the
tool center is low, the top of the scale will come
towards you. If the tool is high, the top of the scale
will move away from you. If it stays vertical the
tool height is perfect. Thi s doesn' t work very well
for di ameters that are so small that the part will
defl ect away under any load. (See page 124 for two
more ways to set tool height. )

FIGURE 23-lf the metal is coming off like it is
being peeledfrom a ro", the speed andfeed settings
are correct. If there is a screeching or chattering
sound, you need 10 adjust speed (m d feed rates.
Above are some aluminum chips that show the cutter
was peeling a continuous strip ofmetal offthe stock.

Making a fint cut
Set the spindle speed at approximately 1<XXl rpm with
gears or belt s. With a S herlin e, turn th e speed
137

reed ratc. You j ust took a cut or.o I 0" (.25mm) and
probably not iced that thc machine didn ' t even slow
down in the sli ghtest. Now take a 1/2" (12mm) long
cut .050" or 1mm deep, whi ch is one revol ution of
the hand wheel. Thi s will change the diameter by
.100". I f you used the sharpened cutting tool that
came with your machinc it shou ld have made the
cut easily. If the tool "squealed", reduce the RPM a
little and take another .050" cut whil e feeding the
1001 faster. You will probably be surpri sed at how
eas il y your machine takes cuts this heavy.
Inducing chatter on purpose to get a feel
for the effects of feed and speed
We will now purposely try to make the machine
chatter. Make sure the stock you are cutting is
sti cking out of the chuck no more than I inch
(25mm). Crank the handwheel two turns further in
from the last setting which will give you a .100"
(100 thousandths of an inch) or 2mm cut. Set the
spind le speed to about 1000 RPM ( 1/3 speed) and
fecd the too l slowly into the material. Vary speed
and feed until you get a substantial chatter. Without
changing the depth of the cut, drop the speed to about
200 RPM and feed the tool into the work with more
force. The chatter should disappear. Once you have
learned to control chatter by adjusting speed and
reed, you wi ll be on your way to becom in g a
machi nist.

in diameter. Has a .687" (17mm) through hole and
314-16 thread. - 115 , t 23

o 10403.125" 3-Jow Chuck-

Larger version of the
chuck above, it holds parts up to 1-1 /2" (38mm) in
diameter in nonnal position and up to 2-3/4" (70mm)
with the jaws reversed. Has a .687" (17mm) through
hole and 3/4-16 thread. - I t 5, 123

~

Holds round or square stock from
3/32" (2mm) up to 1-31\6". With
~ jaws reversed, it wi ll grip stock up
to 2-1 /4" (56mm). Jaws scro ll in
unison as on the 3-jaw chuck. (NOTE: Stock held
in this chuck must be perfectly round or sq uare to
be gripped by all 4 jaws.) - t 15

::::II/,

e

o

1044 2.5" 4-Jow (Independenl)

Cbuck- Each jaw is adjusted
independently, allowing precise
adjustment for perfect centering or
for holding odd-shaped parts.
Four-jaw chucks take a little more
time to use, but offer much greater accuracy and
versati lity. - 115,123

~

o 1030 3,125" 4-Jaw (Independenl) Cbuck-

A larger
version ofthe chuck above for holding larger work.
- 115,123

~

0 1072 1/4" Tailslock Chuck- A

conventional Jacob s drill chuck
. ~ fitted with a #0 Morse arbor so it
.....-- ~ can be used in the tail stock for
center drilling parts. It also comes with a # 1 Morse
arbor and drawbolt so it can be used in the headstock.
Chuck key included. - 124

Use of lathe accessories and attachments
Once you have learned the basics of removing metal
with a lathe you will find that much of the ski ll in
making complicated parts is in learning to use
accessories to accomplish special operations like
knurling, threadi ng and so on. Instructions on the
use of the major accessories are provided in separate
chapters in this book. In order to summarize and
review some of the many accessories available for
a Sherline lathe, I wi ll close with a list a:1d brief
description of each and what it is used fo r. Where
appropriate, a page number referencing where in this
book more information can be found on that
accessory is provided in blue.

o 1069 318" Tol/slock Chuck-

A larger size Jacobs
chuck with arbors for use in both tailstock and
headstock. (Recommended for long bed lathe where
greater center-to-center di stance allows the use of
larger drills and reamers.) Can be used in headstock
as well as tailstock. Chuck key, Morse #0 and #1
arbors and drawbo lt included. - 124
Additional Accessories

o 3050 (30s3) Vertical Milling Columl>-Mounts

Chucks

o

0 1075 4-Jow Sell-Cenlering Chuck-

1in

1041 2.5" 3-Jow Chuck- Three

seconds to prov id e thr ee axes of
. movement to do milling on your lathe.
Headstock and motor/speed contro l mount
to saddle on column. The Z-axis co lumn
provides the same 6.5" (165mm) vertical travel
avai lable on the Sherline milling machine. - I77

jaws scroll in unison to grip round
or hex stock from 3/32" (2mm) up
to 1-3/ 16" (30mm) in diameter.
Jaws are reversible for hold ing
larger stock up to 2-1 /4" (56mm)
138

,
ED
"

I

0 3003 Two Position Tool Post-Save time by

o

mount ing two 1/4" cutting too ls at once so
you can switch quickly from onc to the
other. PIN 3008 holds a 5/ 16" and 3/8" tool.

Holder- Adaptabl e to ho ld any too l you
wish on perfec t center in the tai ls tock.
- 144

o 3057 Rocker Tool Post-

o 2085 (WW) ana 2086 (8mm) Collet
Adapters-Held in PIN 1203 adjustable

Allows exact

control of tool tip height in relation to part
centerline. Tips of o lder, resharpcned
cutting tools can be adjusted up to proper
cutting height without having to use shims.

1001 ho lder above (not included). collet
adapters allow you to usc WW or 8m m co J! ets in
the tail sloc k 10 ho ld smal l dr ill s <I';curate ly on
ce nter. - 144
/'"
0 1291 Headstock Riser Block- Raises
~ headstock 1.25" (31 .7111111) for more
C)~ clearan ce to turn larger s toc k. A lso
includes riser tool post. - 145

0 1074 Steaay Rest-Supports longer work
with three adjustable brass pads. Keeps
, . ..:_ long parts from deflecting away from the
, too l or wobbling while turning. Steadies
the end of long parts for center drilling .- 149
;

.

I

Jrr:

~

0 1090 Follower Red- Moves with saddle

~
: r~'

~

D 3001 Power Feed--A constant speed,
'-... . singl e direct ion motor w ith onl off
p~~ . . switch drives the leadscrew. Lcvcr
below headstoc k engages and
disengages the drive. Saves a lot of hand crank ing
o n long parts and provides smooth fini shes.
~~

~lJi ~'GI

.J?

0 1160 (1/78), 2100, -01, -02, 1162

~
..¢
~

(1179) ColletSet.... Holdin g work in

3035 Spur Driver- A simple way to dri ve
wood from the heads tock in place or <I
3-jaw clluck.

0 3038, 3047 Woaa Tool Rests- Al lows
wood turning on the lathe using hand held
wood cutting too ls.

I
~

0 1fBS (I 184) Vertical Milling Tabll>-Mo unts
' . to the table to provide a vertical "Z axis"
......
movement of2.25" (57mm). A ltho ugh the
vert ical milling co lumn (PIN 3050/3053) is
the preferrcd mcthod , thi s is a traditional
method of doing small milling jobs on the lathe.
Can be very useful for spccial sctups on the vertical
mill too. - 177
D 3015 Toggle Switch Dust Cover- Protects
on/ofT switch on speed control from fin e
dust generated by cutting brass or wood.

and handwheel drives leadscrew to cut over 50
different thread pitches on the
lathe. Inch or metric threads can
be cut on either inch or metric
lathes, - 157

0 1191 Live Center- Rep laces tailstoc k

o 3016 CutoH

dead center lor holding work. Ball bearing
reduces friction while turning between
centers. Requires no lubrication.

+

rest 10 proper height for usc w ith headstock
and lail stoc k riser blocks. - 146

"'

o 3100 Threaa CuNing Attachment-Special gear set

\.J!F>

0 1290SteaayRestRiserBlock- Raises steady

~ D
.,

V'"

individuall y sized co llets is a morc
accurate method than hold ing in a chuck. A number
of sets of standard collets, collet pot chucks and
deluxe coll et sets are available. - 119

~

0 1292 Tai/stock Riser Block-- Ra is es

•• "' , tail stock 1.25" (3 1. 7I11m) to align it with
•
headstock on riser block. - 146

)
and provides s upport right behind the
'-:. : ~ cutting tool to keep long, thin stock from
.
defl ect ing during the cUL - 151

/}

1203 Adjustable Tailstack Custom Tool

Tool Rear Mounting Black-

Allows the part ing tool (PIN 3002) to bc
used on the back side of the tabl e. Thc
cuto ff tool blade is turned upside down in the holder
and th is 13/16" high spacer block keeps the 1001's
cutting point at the lathe' s centerli ne. - 146

0 120 I Adjustable Live Center- Ball bearing

li ve center with adj ustable backing plate
- allows precise alignment of headstock and
tail stock. Adjustable tailstock accessories
like PIN 120 I, 1202 and 1203 are for the craftsman
seeking the ultimate in precision. - 143
. ,

o 4360 Chip Guarei-Clear,

tough

polyca rbonate s hi e
to
Ar,1,;,.. hcads tcck to con tald mountsa nd
in c hips

V'W . .

I5'f-n 0 1202 Adjustable Tailstack Chuck Holae,-

.--

Perfect centeringfor tailstock chuck. - 143
139

cutting fluid s near ch uck . Sw ings
out of way fo r changing setups.

Here is an example of the technique described on page 135 for turning a
very small diameter without having to use a steady rest or follower rest.
This three-stepped shaft was turned with each step being made in one heavy
cut. The large diameter of the stock keeps it from deflecting and the small
shaft is what is "left over" after the cut. The 318" stock was first turned
down to a diameter of.1 50" which was strong enough to support the length
that was to be cut. Then the first step is cut to size and length in one pass by
taking a .0625" cut which reduces the diameter by. J25" to leave just .025".
Then the second step is cut and so on. The small shaft shown here is .025"
(.64mm) in diameter so it could be easily seen in the photo, but smaller sizes
can be cut. Remember that for this technique to work, the tool tip cannot be
above or below center but must be accurately set to the centerline of the
part. Experiment with this technique yourself. and you will be surprised at
how small a shaft you can cut using this method.
\ 40

SEaION 2- lathe Operation

(hapter 3- Tailstock tools and operations
The tailstock on a lathe is used for two main
purposes. The first is to support the long end of work
while it is driven from the headstock and turned

set of ball bearings between the spindle end and the
point to allow the point to tum with the part. Thi s
eliminates friction and makes life a lot easier for
the machinist. This is one of the first accessori es
every machinist wants to acquire, and, once having
worked with one, you will agree your money was
well spent.

" between centers", The other is to hold a drill chuck

or collet to center drill the end of a part. The parts
held in the tailstock spindle include the dead center,

live centers, drill chuck and adjustable tailstock tool
holders. Here is a brief description of each and how

#0 MORSE AIIBOR

each is used.
l¥OMORSECENTn

DRIUCHUCK

fORTAllSSTO(K

#1 MORSECfNTER

# 1 MOISE AIIBOR

FOR HEADSTOCK

~

Dead centers
A dead center is called that because it does not turn .
It has a 60° pointed end which is inserted into a
matching hole drilled in the end of a part to be
supported. This is a system that has been in use on
lathes for many years. Lubrication is an absolute
must to reduce friction between the spinning part
and the fixed dead center. Thermal expansion caused
by the friction-generated heat can cause parts to
"lock up" if the tension adjustment on the tailstock
isn't checked frequently. This is especially important
if you are working with parts made from thermal
plastic which have a tendency to soften and even
melt as a result of too much heat.

Drill chucks
Tai lstock drill chucks look pretty much like the
chucks you normally see on power drills. They are
equipped with a tapered end which fits into the #0
Morse taper on the tailstock spindle and are normally
used to hold center drills or other types of drills for
drilling operations in the ends of parts. Tighten ing
the chuck on a drill is done with a geared " key",
which applies much more force than you could
tightening it by hand. Unlike a power drill , the lathe
spins the part while the drill chuck remains
stationary , but the metal being removed doesn ' t
know the difference.

Each Sherline lathe comes with two dead centers.
The larger one with a # I Morse taper tits in the
headstock spindle. The smaller has a #0 Morse taper
and fits in the tailstock spindle. Removing the dead
center from the spindle is accomplished by backing
the spindle handwheel all the way off until the
center is released from its grip.
live (enten

Sherline offers both 114" and 3/8" tailstock chucks.
Included with each is an additional arbor and
drawbolt so the chuck can also be mounted in the
# I Morse taper of the headstock. An example of
where this might be useful on a lathe would be to
drill a precision hole pattern in a part held on the
vertical milling table which is mounted to the
crosslide. Both size chucks will fit in either Sherline
lathe, but the 3/8" chuck is recommended mainly
forthe longer bed lathe because ofthe chuck's longcr
length. On the short lathe, there isn' t much room
left between centers by the time the larger chuck
and a long drill are mounted in the tail stock. The
1/4" chuck is a better choice for the smaller lathe.

The obvious answer to eliminating friction between
part and center is to have the center tum with the
part. A "live" center is called that because it uses a

t4t

Using a tailstock chuck for center drilling
Because the work turns and the drill does not on a
lathe, it is necessary to use a center drill before a
standard drill can be used. Due to the flexibility of a
standard drill bit, it will tend to wander on the surface
of the rotating work whereas a center drill is designed
to seek the center and begin drilling. Cutting oil is
recommended for all drilling operations. A center
drill should be withdrawn, cleared of chips and oiled
several times during the drilling of a hole to keep
the tip from breaking off.

controlled) which is how the machines have been
manufactured for the last ten years.

Increased accuracy leads to a more demanding clientele
Along with the improved accuracy came another set
of problems; customers are using Sherline tools to
do work that, until now, could only be done on
machines costing thousands of dollars. The
weakest point of the Sherline lathe design is also
the best one; that is, the headstock is removable.
This allows taper cutting, milling conversions, riser
blocks and numerous other setups to be made that
could never be accomplished without this feature.
The negative part of this design is that it is
impossible to have perfect tailstock-to-headstock
alignment. Engineering is always a compromise. In
manufacturing the adjustable tailstock tool holders
we provide a way to overcome the shortcoming but
are also admitting we don't expect to achieve perfect
alignment with the basic tool. 1 still feel the
advantages ofthe design justifY the minor compromise.
Achieving tolerances that approach "perfect"
with the use of adjustable tailstock tools
Only someone new to the machine trade would talk
about "perfect" alignment. In the machine business
you talk tolerances even if you can't measure an
error, because now the error has to be assumed from
the tolerances of your method of checking. To
maximize the use of the Sherline lathe we introduced
a series of three tool holders. Holders such as these
have always been used in setting up turret lathes
and screw machines in the machine trade to make
up for the inaccuracies in machine tools or the lack
of room for drill chucks, etc.
The Sherline holders have a Morse #0 taper to fit
the tailstock and a choice of three tool holders: An
adjustable live center, an adjustable drill chuck
holder and an adjustable tool holder.

Tailslock center drilling. The work turns while the
drill is held stationary in the tai/stock chuck.

Tailstack drilling
Hold the work in a 3- or 4-jaw chuck. If the work is
longer than approximately 3" (76mm), support the
free end with a steady rest. Fit the drill chuck to the
tailstock with a # 0 Morse arbor and secure a center
drill in the chuck. Adjust the tailstock to bring the
center drill close to the work and lock it in position.
Turn the tailstock hand wheel to bring the center drill
forward. After the hole is started with the centerdrill,
switch to a standard drill bit of the desired size to
drill the hole.

How adjustable tool holders work
These holders are simple to use. They are divided
into two parts with flanges. These flanges are bolted
Tightening tolerances overth e years
together with two screws. A little extra clearance in
The Sherline lathe has come a long way since its
the holes for these screws allows the front to be
original conception in the late 1960's. It started out
adjusted in relation to the rear. The rear section has
as a machine that could be manufactured and sold
a witness mark (hole). This hole should always be
at a very reasonable price, but the accuracy was such
located at the top so the holder is located the same
that it had limited use. Wh.en I purchased the
. way in the tailstock each time.
company in 1974 and started to produce these
machines in the USA, I completely changed the
Maximizing accuracy
manufacturing methods and "tightened the
The accuracy that is attainable is governed by the
tolerances". The biggest improvement in the product
amount of skilled effort you put forth. Before
came with the advent ofCNC machines (computer
starting, it's wise to clamp your headstock square
142

Here an adjustable tailstock holder allows the drill chuck to be perfectly centered/or center drilling a part.
A slight amount ofplay between the front and back half of the holder allows the drill chuck to be brought
into perfect alignment with the center of the headstock.

with the bed. This can usually be accomplished by
loosening the headstock and pushing back evenly
against the alignment key (located under the
headstock) and retightening.

lW

OR3"~

DRIUCHUCK
ADJUSJUU DRIU
CHUCK HOLDER

Marking tho ,ontor of tho part
To line up the tailstock chuck. put a scrap piece in
the 3-Jaw that sticks out approximately 3/4" and face
and center drill the end with your present Morse #0
arbor and drill chuck. The center drill will find
center of the stock even though the chuck may not
be lined up perfectly.

new at best. Accurate drill chucks cost
approximately 4 times as much and only run within
.002". They might claim .00 I ", but I haven ' t seen it
unless you have brand new everything. They are not
a good investment for the home shop machinist.

Bringing tho adjustoblo drill ,hu,k holdor
into final alignment
Next, mount the drill chuck on the adjustable arbor
with the center drill still in it. Bring the tailstock up
until the center drill is in the just drilled hole with
the screws loose. Tighten when you feel it' s on
center in the hole. Repeat this process to assure
alignment using the new adjustable arbor. This
should be close enough for a drill chuck because
drili chucks are only accurate within .003" when

SeHing the adjustable live
center using the same setup
With the drill chuck aligned
you can use the same setup to
align the adjustable live center
by putting the point into the
center drilled hole and
tightening the screws to start.
143

Tum a test bar and correct any error. This can be
time consuming and adjustments can be made by
never locking the screws so tight that you can't move
it with a few taps of a small mallet. When aligned to
your satisfaction, sc rews can then be tightened
completely.
performance by "truing up" the armature. Most
racing motors use a 1/8" shaft, which is held in a
brass bushing on the armature support. The driven
end can be held with a chuck or a 1/8" WW collet.
A diamond tipped tool will give a mirror-like finish
when turning copper, but a sharp high speed steel
tool works fine too. This is a very specialized part
for a specialized use, but typical of the kinds of
things I have been asked to add to the line to make a
particular job easier.

(USTOM MADE S{IO.D. SPUT (OUIT TO
HOlD TOOL
TOOt. HOLDER

The adjustable tool holde,
The adjustable tool holder allows the use of larger
drills and cutting tools that can't be held in a standard
drill chuck. Tools are held in a split bushing that
can easily be made. The outside diameter has to be
.625" and the inside diameter is cut to fit the tool
you wish to hold. The bushing is then split through
one side with a hacksaw or slitting saw in the
direction of the hole. The tool can now be clamped
in the holder using this split bushing.

WW (ollet ada pte,

The WW collet adapter is held in the adjustable
tailstock tool holder to mount WW collets in the
tailstock. This allows you to hold extremely small
drills accurately on center. Drills only a few
thousandths of an inch in diameter are easily broken
if not perfectly centered. In addition, with a 1/8"
collet, it can do the same job as the 1/8" armature
support above, but with even greater accuracy. When
you consider that the only alternative to this kind of
center drilling accuracy is a far less versatile
jeweler's lathe costing thousands of dollars, the
slight extra time spent to set up using the adjustable
tail stock tools is very well spent.

I personally don't believe a person should try to get
these any more accurate than you realistically need.
Machining is a process that takes place under high
loads and temperatures. A perfectly aligned machine
doesn't produce a perfect part without the skill of
an operator who copes with the many variables. The
skill of machining is making parts that are of a closer
tolerance than those of the machine you are working
with. If you cut a slight taper on a lathe there is
nothing wrong with straightening it with a flat mill
file and polishing with 320 grit wet/dry sandpaper.
This should only take a couple of minutes. Trying
to align your machine could take hours only to find
the machine aligned to perfect specs but your cutter
was dull and below center. Please, don't become a
machini st who can never get a job done correctly
becau se of the equipment on hand. I've seen
beautiful parts produced in machine shops using
equipment that was worn out twenty years ago. It's
the machinist s that build these parts not the
machines!

1/8" Armature support
The use of electric motors in radio controlled cars
and boats has seen an increase in the number of
builders who wish to increa se their motor's

A collet ;s held in the adapter and the adapter is
centered in the tai/stock tool holder allowing perfect
center drilling accuracy with extremely small drills.

144

lEGION 1- Lathe Operation

Chapter 4- Riser blocks for larger work

Making a 3.5" loth. into a 6" loth. for light duty jobs
The riser block is the result of customers' requests
to get more out of their Sherline tools. It is simply a
block of mate nat 1.235" (3tmm) thick. The block
is designed to be quickly installed under the
headstock, adding twice the thickness of the riser to
the diameter that can be turned. This brings the
diameter that can be turned to almost six inches
(150mm). Don't plan on machining parts six inches
in diameter very often, for most materials this size
far exceed the capabilities of a Sherline lathe. I
believe a riser block could be helpful when used to
make a part like a flywheel occasionally, but the
machine's design wasn't intended to work with large
diameters. It would be like putting a one-inch drill
bit in a small hand drill. The spacer block kit also
includes a correspondingly taller tool post.

A headstock riser block and corresponding riser
toolpost make it possible to turn this large Nylon
ring. A 3-jaw chuck with itsjaws reversed holds the
part from the inside.
spindle I redesigned it and sold it as a separate
accessory. The tool post would be useless on a mill
and the original design used a two-hole offset. The
new design was superior because we eliminated this.
When we bought our laser engraver we were able to
engrave the riser block with a pattern of degrees to
show how far the headstock was rotated.

Turning big parts between centers requires
another riser at the tailstock end
It wasn't long before we began getting requests for
a tailstock riser, and we manufactured one. The
shortcoming of the tailstock riser was that the lathe
tailstock had to be removed and installed on the riser
block. To remove the tailstock the handwheel had
to be removed. This isn ' t how I like to desi gn
products, but the purchasers have not complained.
They realize there simply wasn't any other solution
to the problem.

Riser block becomes a headstock
spacer block on the mill
When I found that the riser block was being used on
a Sherline mill to get more usable room under the
145

out of the way for nonnal machining. This can be
handy when making multiple parts. (Instructions for
its use can be found on page 76.)
Staying accurate when using riser blocks
One point to be considered is accuracy. When you
start clamping several pieces together, ali gnment
will suffer. In the real world of machining, spindles
are aligned by indicating, not with pins or keys. This
wouldn't be the best way for hobbyists to start, and
I believe the methods we use give our average
customer machining capabilities they could never
have without experience. As your projects get more
and more complex, these methods may not be good
enough. We manufacture adjustable tool holders (for
more infonnation see page 142.) to help eliminate
some of these problems caused by misalignment. If
you believe alignment could be a problem, machine
a piece of scrap as a test piece to get the machine
lined up. Don't risk a part you may have a lot of
work in.

(Above) A riser block brings the tailstock up to the
proper height to align with the headstock when it is
011 (/ riser block.
(Be/ow) A shorter secrioll ofthe same extrusion was
easy to adapt to make a special riser block for the
steady rest.

You may have to use a little ingenuity when turning
large diameters because of the limited crosslide
throw on standard machines.
Installing lathe riser blocks
Remove the headstock by loosening the screw that
holds it onto the lathe or mill and lift it straight off.
Now install the riser block using the keyway to align
it. Do this by pushing the riser block back towards
the keyway without a twisting motion. Put the
headstock back with or without the keyway
depending on your next machining operation. For
example, ifsetting up to do taper turning you would
leave the alignment key out.

We learn a lesson on how some customers
actually use our tools
Nex t came a riser for the steady rest. A couple of
customers made enough noise, and I finally gave in
and produced one. J didn't realize customers were
leaving their lathes set up with riser blocks and didn't
want to remove them to use the steady rest. The good
part about a riser block setup is you can turn larger
diameters. The bad part is a customer will lose some
rigidity. Another engineering compromise.

To install the tailstock riser block, it is necessary to
remove the tailstock. To do this you must first
remove the handwheel at the end of the bed. You
may have a slight problem fitting this up. The riser
block is a very difficult part to make because
dovetails can 't be measured or machined easily. The
biggest problem we have encountered is the " tip"
of the dovetail on the lathe bed may interfere with
the riser block. A couple of passes with a file should

A riser block that's really a reversing block
for the cutoff tool holder
Sherline also manufactures a riser for the cutoff
holder. In this case, however, the purpose isn', to
increase the diameter that can be cut off. With the
riser under the cutoffholder, the cutoffblade can be
reversed and mounted on the back side of the slide.
Thi s will allow you to leave the cutoff holder
mounted on the back portion of the crosslide and

FILE CORNER

fiLE CORNER

UGHnv~
.:'
.
.

LUHE BED

LIGHTlY

:.
,
.

Filing corners of bed dovetail for better fit of
Tailstock Riser Block.
146

fix it. Riser Blocks made after 11 /93 are of a twopiece design that in most cases eliminates this fitting
problem. When replacing the hand wheel try to let

the set screw pick up the same indentation so you
don't "c hew up" the end of the lead scrcw shaft.
"..,10, 101101......

A large part is being roughed out to size using riser blocks on both the headstock and Ihe lailslock. The
riser toolpost is used 10 bring the cutting 1001 up to the proper height. Riser blocks allow parts as large as
6" to be turned over the bed or 3.1" over the crosslide. For Ihose who prefer 10 leave their lathe in this
configuration and need 10 turn a long, thin pari, a riser block is also available for the steady rest (not
shown, see previous page).

\47

A feast for the tabletop machinist. This was the first cover photo Craig shot for the book After thinking
about it for a while we had second thoughts and were afraid it might be mistaken for a cookbook in the
book stores. We decided to go with a cover that was a lillie more descriptive but thought you might enjoy
seeing this one anyway.

148

SECTION 2- lathe Operation

Chapter 5- Supporting long or thin work
with a center drill. This can be difficult if the work
isn't held properly. A steady rest ean come to the
rescue and allow machining on the end of this bar. I
have seen many worn out full size lathes with a brand
new steady rest. Steady rests don ' t get nearly as
much use on full size machines as they do on
miniature lathes.

When 10 use a steaciy rest and
when to use a follower fell

THE STEADY REST
The steady rest was one of the accessories that started
life in Australia. When I started making the tooling
to produce Sherline's lathe in America I had so many
other problems I forgot all about it. I had decided to
add 112" to the diameter the Sherline lathe could
tum to make it four-inch lathe. This would give me

"one up" on my main competitor, the "Unimat"
lathe. To accomplish this was easy because all I had
to do was add 114" of material to the new extrusion
dies for the headstock and tailstock. The drawings

One of the main differences between a steady rest
and a follower rest is that the steady rest is clamped
to the bed and doesn't move, while the follower rest
is clamped to the saddle which moves along the lathe
bed. (Instructions for use of a follower rest begin on
page 152.) Materials will deflect away from the
cutting tool when being turned on a lathe. Long,
slender parts that are not rigid enough to support
cutting loads will deflect when they are machined,
unless they have support. If the difference in
diameter were around a few thousandths of an inch
(.05mm) in the middle of the cut, I would probably
just file the part to the proper diameter rather than
taking the time to set up either accessory. Long
pieces of bar stock that need to have their outside
diameter turned need to be supported as they are

were done, and I was meeting with a large metal
extruder in Los Angeles. I would need several dies
made, and I was getting the final costs and delivery
infonnation. For some reason, in the middle of the
conversation, it occurred to me that the existing
steady rest tooling wouldn't work if I made a 4"
lathe. A new mold to produce a diecast steady rest
would have cost $1 0,000, and my new business was
just barely surviving. I changed the drawing right
on the spot, and the Sherline lathe remained a
3-1 /2" lathe, but I still wish I had the money at that
time to build a new mold.

Smaller lathes make use of the steady rest more often
Tabletop machine tools all have one thing in
common; that is, the hole through the spindle is
small. This means you can't take a 4" long piece of
3/4" bar stock and put it in the lathe with only the
end protruding from the 3-jaw chuck. The piece
would have to be held with 3-1/2" of material
sticking out unsupported. Even if you plan to use a
supporting center you first must drill a "center" hole

To drill a hole in the end ofa 10111' "h,,/I,
set up with a center drill in the
which is
mounted in the tai/stock The steady rest keeps the
shaft from wobbling and also assures that the hole
will be concentric with the outside diameter of the
part.
t49

machined. For this type of work, I recommend a
follower over a steady rest. For a long shaft that
only needs machining in a small area, the steady
rest may be a better choice.

Using the steady rest on the
un.upportod ond of 0 long port
The best way to hold a long part is with a center
mounted in the tailstock. However, for one reason
or another this is not always possible. As an example,
it may be a piece of stock that you want to centerdrill so that you can mount it between centers, or it
may be a part where a center hole would ruin the
looks of the part. Whatever the reason, the steady
rest provides a means of supporting the part.
The Sherline steady rest has three adjustable brass
blades mounted in a holder which mounts on the
bed of the lathe. These blades can be set to the
diameter of the part to provide necessary support
while it turns.
Another advantage of the steady rest which is
often overlooked is the fact that work which is held
in position by the steady rest turns concentric with
its outside diameter. This means that concentricity
is assured when working near the steady rest
because at that point it must be running perfectly
true despite imperfections in the way it is chucked
or centered at either end. The farther away the steady
rest is mounted from the chuck holding the work,
the more any error in chucking is canceled out.

A

B

SMAll
REMOvt
CORNERS

DlAMrn.
~.uT

A) Mark each blade where it contacts the part and
grind of!corners for clearance. Note that the contact
point mayor may not be at the center of the blade.
B) All three blades can now contact the part without
their corners interfering with each other.

5o"lng up Ih ••Ioady ro.1
The easiest way to set up a steady rest is to first
mount the part to be machined in a collet or 3-jaw
chuck. Then mount the steady rest onto the bed of
the lathe and slide it over the free end of the part
and up as close to the chuck as it will go. The three
blades ofthe steady rest can then be adjusted in until
they just contact the part, supporting it but not
binding it. For small diameter parts, it may be
necessary to cut or file off the comers of the blades
so they contact the part without touching each other.
While the blades are close to the chuck, mark where
the center of the small diameter stock contacts the
blade. (Because the casting is not extremely precise.
the blades may not contact the part at their center.
This does not affect their function.) File or grind off
the comers as needed so the blades contact the part
but not each other. (See drawing at lower left.) If
I'm working with a close tolerance part, I may also
"wear in" the pads to the exact diameter by using a
little more pad pressure and some oiL I then reset
their position and don't have to worry about the pads
wearing as fast. Use a low RPM and lubricant on
the pads to keep pad wear to a minimum.
Solving unique machining problems

A Sherline customer made pads with rollers for his
steady rest, making the steady rest like its full size
counterpart. Another customer had a problem when
using a steady rest with Sherline's watchmaker's
T- rest. When working with very small watch parts,
the T-rest could not be brought close enough to the
steady rest to work on the pivot. I suggested that he
make special pads that protrude out to the side to
solve this problem. One ofthe things makes machining
fun is that you can solve your own problems when
you have the tools to make what you need.

Slid. Ih ••Ioady rosllnlo po.llion and .Iart (u"lng
Once the blades are set and locked in place, the
steady rest can be slid back out to support the free
end ofthepart. If you want to check the accuracy of
your setup, you can use a dial indicator mounted on
the crosslide. Once you are satisfied with the setup,
apply a drop or two of oil where the blades come in
contact with the part and you are ready to start
machining. The Sherline steady rest will
accommodate work up to 1.75" diameter.
NOTE: A steady rest riser block is available which
makes it possible to use the steady rest on the lathe
with the headstock and tailstock riser blocks in place.
See page 146 for more on using riser blocks.
150

A steady rest is commonly used to support the end of a long part so it can be center drilled. The hole can
then be used to locate either a live or dead center in the tai/stock to supporl (he pari during machining.
151

"'SCHW

TlGHTtNS
ONSADDlI

-~'lS~~~

THE FOLLOWER REST
One of the design requirements I have imposed upon
FIGURE I- follower rest installed on lathe. (Tool
o
post removed/ r clarity.)

rnyselfwas that all accessories could be mounted to

a Sherline machine tool without any additional
machining or modifications. I will have failed as a
designer if customers must modify their machines

outside diameter because that is where it is
supported. It isn ' t necessary to have the free end of
the stock supported by a center when using a
fo ll ower, but it does make for a better setup ,
especially for larger diameters.

to mount any accessory. To accomplish this takes
some good ideas, and for a long time I just couldn' t

seem to come up with one for a follower rest. It was
bouncing around in the back of my mind for years

before I came up with a solution I liked. A friend
and customer, Larry Kombrink:, who likes to design
accessories for hi s lathe, started working on a

TOOl

design for me. Although the final follower design
was quite a bit different than Larry' s design, it was
his design that got the wheels in my brain turning.
This is a perfect example of why you should build
a prototype as soon as possible. You need something
physical to look at to get your mind working at
100%.

IWSPAD

".,
FIGURE 2-Cutting/orces on a part and how they
are countered by the follower rest supports.

The purpose of a follower resl

When using a center to support the free end, newer
Sherline lathes manufactured after mid-1996 have
a cutout in the tailstock to allow it to overlap the
table. Older machines may require the use of a
tailstock spindle extension (PIN 1220) for clearance.
If you are using a tailstock center, the pads should
be set by moving the fo llower rest as close to the
tailstock as possible, tightening and returning to
cutting position.

The reason this tool is called a "follower" is because
the brass supports actually move along with or
" follow" the cutter. It is used to support a piece of
round stock while it is being machined to keep the
part from deflecting away from the tool. In a
normal setup, the Sherline fo llower rest will lead
the tool. (See Figures 1 and 4.)
A follower rest works because it counters the two
main forces applied by the tool. When a tool is
cutting, the stock wants to climb up on the tool as
well as be pushed away_The top brass pad wi ll keep
the stock from climbing up, and the brass pad in the
rear will keep the stock from being pushed away .
The stock will then be cut concentric with the

Mounting the follower rest 10 the saddle
The Sherline follower rest attaches to the lathe saddle
with a flat ended set screw. Push down on the
follower rest as you tighten this screw so it is
clamped flat on the bed. The small block which
mounts by means of the crosslide " T" slot is
152

positioned so that the nylon tip set screw pushes
down on the machined top surface of the body of
the follower rest.

CROSSliDE
fOUOWER
REST BODY
• mCHMENT

SETSCREW

- t:=:!L______~

FIGURE 3- follower hold down block in position.

'0s -,
l" "

'"

'-:::

,

:-", j

'~L'"

' ", I~

'~ ,) '-,

FIGURE 4- follower rest set up in normal position
with pads leading the cutting tool.

SeNing the position of the support pads
To set the pad position, put the round piece you plan
to machine in the collet or chuck you will be using.
Tum the spindle by hand to make sure the part runs
reasonably true . Move the saddle (with the follower
rest attached) close to the spindle. Loos~n the pad
clamping screws, bring the brass pads in contact with
the part and retighten the screws to lock them in
place. Then move the follower rest back to the
position required for the cut and the pads will be

UtmRUNES

Of BlASS

PAD,

FIGURE 5- Remove the corners of the pad tips to
allow them 10 come closer together for small parts.

aligned with the headstock end of the stock. If you
are dealing with very small diameter part, it may be
necessary to modi fy the ends of the pads to assure
contact. (See Figure 5.)
With a small diameter rod held in a chuck or co llet,
transfer the center of the part to the side of eac h
pad using a scribe. Because of "tolerance buildup",
the line may not fall on the exact center of the
pad, but that will not affect the function of the
follower .

Tips for using the follower rest
The round stock you use with this attachment should
be very round and have a good finish. If the stock is
not round, the fini shed part will have the same shape
because the part rotates supported by its outside
diameter. A poor surface finish on the part will cause
excessive wear on the pads. This in turn can cause
your part to taper. To minimi ze wear, alway s
lubricate the pads with oil when cutting. It would
be wise to set up with a piece of scrap of the same
material and diameter as your actual stock.
When using a follower of thi s type, yo u will
usually cut to the finished diameter in one pass. If
you need a close tolerance part, it may be easier to
tum it sl ightly oversize, bring it to size with a good,
flat mill file and polish it with 320 grit wet/dry
sandpaper. If you have a lot of pieces to make, it
pays to spend a little extra time getting the setup
just right.

Making the cut
Run the follower rest down the part until the pads
are near the end and the tool is just off the end. Dial
in the desired depth of cut. If the end of the part is
not supported by a center, the part may tend to spring
away from the pads a little when not being pressed
on by the tool. If the part isn' t running perfectly
true, it could cause a problem at the start of the cut
because the part isn' t in constant contact with the
brass pads. If thi s is the case, slip a loop of paper
around the part and pull back lightly until the part
rests against the pads. Paper is used because it will
tear if it gets wrapped around the part, and it will
not pull your hand in as could happen if you use a
rag or strip of cloth.
Now run the lathe at about 200 RPM and keep the
part in position with the paper loop until you begin
cutting. If you don't do this, it could cause a
problem if the cutter starts to cut and the end of the
stock is bouncing around because it isn't running
153

have to hold the stock against the pads to prevent
"undercutting" as pressure from the tool is released.

Turning stock other than round
If you need to tum around end on material that isn't
round (like hex or square stock), the tool must lead
the pads so that the pads are running on the round
surface cut by the tool. The tool can be mounted
almost parallel with the bed to accomplish this. (See
Figure 7 below.) Take your initial (starting) cut with

the end of the part held close to the chuck for support.
Then move it out into position where the follower
rest pads are supporting the newly machined round
surface of the part and cut to size.

CROSSUDE
HOLDOOWN
BLOC<

FIGURE 6-Supporting a long part with a paper
loop is a safe way to keep it against the pads until
the tool is cutting properly.
straight or is bent. Take a heavy enough cut to keep
the stock firmly against the pads but still larger than
the final dimension. Cut about 1/8" (4mm) of length,
stop and measure the amount of error and then adjust
the crosslide accordingly. (The tool will move but
the follower will not.) If the diameter is correct, cut
the distance required. By cutting only 1/8" the pads
are still supporting the part if you take another cut.

Some more hints for geHing a good cut
The part size may vary as the pads seat in. Remember
to keep them oiled. Keep the RPM down and the
feed rate up. A slight radius on the tool tip will
improve the finish. When you stop cutting you may

TOOl P<lS1

ANa TOOL

fOUOWER REST BODY

FIGURE 7- Cutting non-round stock
Practice on a piece of map before your final cut
I have found it best to always start with a piece of
scrap material identical to your final part for
experimentation with the setup. The follower rest is
not hard to use, but you really need to tum a practice
part first to get your speed and feed rates correct.

154

A follower rest is used to support thin stock. It has the advantage ofplacing the sllpport directly behind the
cutting tool which keeps the part from deflecting. Unlike the steady rest which is attached to the bed (Ind
does not move, the follower rest is attached to the saddle so it moves with the cut and ''follows'' the fOol.

155

Quick change tool posts are a popular item for full
size lathes. Shown above is the prototypefor a quick
change toolpost and holders designed to fit the
Sherline lathe. It wellf into production in the Fall of
1998. The post has dovetails 011 two sides. The
holders are dropped over the appropriate dovetail
and the tool height is adjusted with the knurled brass
knobs. The holder is then locked in place with a
5/32" hex key which is the same tool used to tighten
or adjust most Sherline fUllctiollS. A round, sprillg·
loaded cylinder is pushed agaillSl the imide of the
dovetail which firmly locks the holder in place.
Holders can be easily and quickly changed to switch
tools.
Shown are holders for (left to right) a 1/4" cutting
tool, a 3/8" round boring tool, an inserted tip carbide
tool and a Sherlille cutoff tool. Three of the holden
will be ineluded with the toolpost, while the holder
for the illSerted carbide tip will be availabie as a
separate option The post and holders are madefrom
case hardened steel and have a black oxide finish.
This is all accessory that has been requested often
over the years, but SlterJille had 1I0t produced one
IIlllil a design could be formulated that offered the
quality required while still keeping the cost in
proportion to the tabletop tools it would be used
on. It is easy to design a $600 toolpost, but it is
milch harder to develop one half that price that
works just as well.
Note on photo at right: George Luhrs went on to win the
Sherline Machinist's Challenge contest in 2000 and 2001
with running four-cycle mulli<ylinder engines even more
complicated than the one shown 10 the right. He was
selected as the Joe Martin Foundation's "Metalworking
Craftsman of the Year" for the year 2001 .

This could be one of the smallest runlling 4·cyele
engines ever built. It cOlltains 82 componell1s alld
is only about an inch tall. It was built by George
Luhrs of Shoreham. New York and finished second
in the 1998 SherJine Machinist's Challenge cOlllest.
156

SECTION 2-lathe Operalian

Chapter 6- Geffing started in thread cuffing
Taps, dies and cuffing oils
In the home shop, threads are produced on metal
with taps and dies or by "single pointing" on a lathe.
Taps are also discussed in the cutting tool section
and it would be wise to read it before buying any.
Taps put threads in holes. Dies put threads on the

An adjustable split die.
sometimes called a
"bullon die ".

outside of rods. Taps and dies come in a wide
variety of threads and the standard screw thread sizes
are reasonably priced. For the home machinist, taps
will be used more than dies because of the wide
array of choices available in screws and bolts.

shaft or, like a tap that hasn't been started square, it
wi ll start cutting on one side more than the other as
it is "screwed" onto the shaft. A liberal amount of
cutting oil is a must to produce good threads, and if
you have to put a lot ofthreads on "tough" materials,
I would even consider that smell y, dirty high sulfur
cutting oil. The type of material selected plays an
important role in producing good threads. Gummy
materials like cold-roll ed steel should be avoided if
a good thread finish is desired.

Adjustable spl it dies or " button dies " arc
inexpensive. They are held in a spec ial holder and

can be used for noncritical threads. They usually
have a way of adjusting the thread pitch diameter
size with a split slot that can be adjusted with a screw.
It is important that the die is started squarely to the

1

J

1

A Sherline lathe set up with a thread cutting attachment is capable of cutting a large variety of threads in
both inch and metric leads. Hand cranking the threads gives the machinist a lot of control.
157

method works. In this case the diameter of the hole
has to he very accurate to produce a good thread.
There aren't any chips produced and they work well
in gummy material. Plenty of cutting oil is a must.

Removing a die from the part
It is possible to cut a perfectly good thread on a shaft
and ruin it when the die is unscrewed. After the shaft
has been threaded to its proper length, tum the die
back and forth to break the chip loose before
unscrewing the die. The chip can get jammed
between the thread and die and destroy the thread
as the die is unscrewed. Be sure to use a little cutting
oil to keep from damaging the thread. As taps and
dies are making the last few turns to .unscrew from
the work, the tap or die has to be gently turned to
keep from damaging the thread. At this point the
thread on the cutting tool isn't supported and fits
loosely. If the tap ordie is allowed to get crooked it
can tear up the first couple of threads. The thread
can also be damaged at this time by using excessive
force (in or out). Remember, that these first few
threads are your starting threads and a damaged
thread is hard to "start".
More ways to cut threods
Production equipment offers a few more ingenious
methods to produce threads, and I'll name a few.
Each method has its good and bad points.

Single pointing threods on 0 lothe
Single pointing threads on a lathe is interesting. The
threads that you cut will usually be a section of
another part. It would be foolish to waste time
cutting a thread to replace a broken screw that could
be easily purchased. A thread cut on the full length
ofa small diameter can be difficult if the shaft isn't
rigid enough to withstand cutting loads without
deflecting. A follower rest (see previous chapter)
must be used to support the material as it is cut.
Single point threads are com:entrit with the spindle
One of the main advantages of single pointed threads
is often overlooked. Threads that have been
produced in this fashion will run true with the
spindle, and if all critical diameters are cut at the
same time, the thread will run perfectly true with
the part. The Sherline spindle 3/4-16 TPI is a good
example of this. When I first started manufacturing
the spindles, the thread was cut as a separate
operation, and the matching chuck body thread was
produced with a tap. It was next to impossible to
have these two parts screw together without an
error. Today we single point the threads, put the
Morse #1 taper on during the same operation and
have a thread that runs out less than .00 I".

SElf·OPENING
GlOMmIC DIE HEAD
THlEAD (HASEIS

How Sherline's thread tuHing aHathment tame about
I didn't plan on building the screw cutting
attachment exactly the way it ended up. My
immediate problem was to produce a set of gears
that was affordable, and this I explain in a different
part of the book. I purchased a "gear hobher" and
figured out how to make it run. Gear tooth shapes
are generated with a hob. A hob looks like a wonn
gear with cutting edges. The machine is then geared
so the gear blank is turned at the proper speed to
mate with the hob (cutter). It isn't a fast process,
but there is no need to watch over it, and it turns
itself offautomatically at the end ofthe cut. Hobbing
my own gears allowed me to produce gears in small
quantities that didn't cost a fortune.

Thread chasing
Thread chasing uses a special die to cut threads. For
production use, the cutting tools are mounted on a
die head. When the end of the thread is reached, the
die head pops open like a 3-jaw chuck. This
eliminates the need to reverse the spindle and back
the die off the thread.
Thread rolling and form tapping
Thread rolling is a process that crushes the thread
form into a rod with dies that do not cut. The rod
must be centerless ground to tight tolerances. This
allows the displaced material to fonn the top half of
the thread. A blank diameter that is offby only .001"
can have a major effect on the finished product. Also
made is a series of taps for a process called "fonn
tapping". These taps form threads in a hole by
displacing metal the same way as the thread rolling

After cutting a set of gears for my attachment I knew
I had solved only one of my problems. To cut the
expanded range of threads, you couldn't disconnect
the spindle from the leadscrew without losing your
place. To check out my gear combinations, I took
158

and cutting threads for your own use.
Your advantage over a commercial shop
The reason other books go into such great detail on
the precise methods used commercially is that they
are telling you how to cut threads from specifications
for other people. They have to have exact methods
and standards to make sure that a bolt made in
California will screw into a nut manufactured in New
York. Fortunately, we have the tremendous
advantage of having both pieces at hand and we can
just "keep cutting 'ti l they fit". It's as simple as that.
You just select the proper gear from the chart, put
in a 60° threading tool and have at it!

A Ihread cUlling allachmenl (or screw culling
attachment) on a Sherline lathe. (The cranking
handle is shown removed so you can see the
geartrain. A small lever on the side o/the lalhe base
jusl above the handle engages and disengages Ihe
leadscrew. Though hand cranking a lathe to make
threads may sound like a step backwards, it actually
offers several advanlages.

How a lathe actually (ut. a thread
A point to ponder about thread cutting is how a lathe
produces a thread. It doesn't matter whether it's a
20" lathe or a 3" lathe, the principle is the same.
The leadscrew that drives the saddle is geared
directly to the spindle. When the spindle turns, the

the motor and speed control off and put a crank
handle on the rear of the spindle. I set up gears for
twenty-ei ght threads per inch. I planned to make a
1/4" diameter, 28 threads per inch bolt. It would be
easy to check because there were hex nuts around
my shop I could use to check the thread. I engaged
the leadscrew and took my fi rst pass (cut) by
cranking the spindle by hand. I stopped cranking
when I got to the head of the bolt, backed out the
crosslide, and cranked the spindle backwards until
I was back at my starting point. The crosslide was
returned to a position that would take the second
cut and I cranked the spind le and took the second
cut. It was as easy as tapping a hole with a hand tap.
You could stop close to a shoulder without worrying
about "crashing". It would be perfect for a novice
machinist. I felt it might be a tough item to sell
because hand cranking looked like a step in the
wrong direction, but it really worked well so I put it
into production.

A little history...
Why making the first leadscrew was a problem
Consider this: You are a blacksmith in the 19th
century and you need a screw thread. At that
time no one had yet produced a screw thread.
A lathe produces a thread by gearing the
leadscrew to the spindle, but there weren't any
screws that could be used as a standard, much
less a leadscrew. (This is one of the reasons
so many rivets were used in those days.)
Industry mounted a concentrated effort to
produce a standard thread that would produce
the " father" of all screw threads. The first one
would have to be made by hand. The best
craftsmen in the world started on this project.
They kept improving the thread by finding a
section that had the best pitch and reproducing
it, over and over again. Eventually the errors
canceled out and they had their standard.

I was amazed I had done so much knowing so little
After designing and putting the screw cutti ng
attachment into production, I sat down and started
reading what other people had written about
cutting sc re w threads before writing my own
instructions. It amazed me that I had been able to
cut threads all these years while knowing so little.
How and why I was able to do this is going to be the
subject of some ofthe instructions that follow. There
are many books avai lable that go into additional
detail on the subject if required. The following
examples are based on using sharp pointed 60° tools

Making the firstleadscrew was kind ofa "chicken and
the egg" type problem. YOIl need one to make one.

159

saddle moves. I f they were geared one-te-onc, the
pilCh cut would be the same as the pitch of the
leadscrcw. On the 3" lathe, this would be 20 Threads
Per Inch (TPI). Ifwe turned the leadscrew 180° while
we turned the spindle 360 0 (by using a 20-tooth to a
40-loolh gear arrangement) we would cut 40 TP!.
Please note that we did not have to consider the
stock ' s diameter. The only requirement is that the
major diameter is at least twice the depth of the
thread plus enough material to support these threads
while cutting them. One gets used to hearing a
diameter called out with the threads, such as
1/4-20.6-32 , 10-24, etc., but while it's unusual to
think of 40 threads per inch cut on something 2" in
diameter, in some cases it may be entirely practicable
to do so. For example, some camera lens parts have
large diameters and a very fine thread.

-fI:

aBI

How can you cut a metric thread with on inch leadscrew?
It may interest you to know how a metric thread can
be cut on a 3" lathe that has American National screw
threads on its leadscrew. The I 27-tooth conversion
gear does this by driving the leadscrew at a ratio
that converts 20 TPI to I mm. Consider lOOT (a 100tooth gear) on the spindle driving a 127T. The ratio
is .7874 to I. The lead screwhas20TPI which means
one thread is .050" long. Therefore: .050" P x .7874
= .03937" = Imm. By the same token, inch threads
can also be cut on a machine with a metric leadscrew.
Understanding "pitch diameter"
Take the timc to familiarize yourselfwith component
parts of the screw thread from Figures I and 3. The
pitch diameter is the important one to consider.
Before going on, let's take the time to reall y
understand why. The pitch diameter detennines how
a screw or thread will fit, not the major diameter.
Suppose you were cutting 20 TPI and the major
diameter was .010 undersize and the pitch diameter
was correct. About the only thing wrong would be
that the flat on the point of the thread would be a
little wide, but it would still have approximately 75%
of its strength and work well.

HfUX ANGU

"..\1"-

r

PliO!

10"

t Tl"
MAJOI DI.t. ] MlrtOl D
.

~: =-r

SlMGUDmH

Df THWJI

Now let us suppose we cut the pitch diameter
undersize by .010. We would end up with a nut that
fits so loose and a thread that was so weak that wc
would have to scrap it. This is where "cutting to fit"
comes in. You can compensate for some pretty bad
errors on the major and minor diameters by having
the pitch diameter correct. To get it correct, all you
have to do is to keep trying it for size as you cut.
Don' t ever take the part out of the chuck to try it
because it would be next to impossible to re-chuck

IHtaMESS

OF IHIWI

FIGURE I~Co mponenf parts and shape ofa rolled
thread. A thread cut with a sharp 60° tool wU/ not
have oj/at at the root ofthe thread but will come to
a point.

TERMS
MAJOR DIAMETER- Largest diameter of the
thread of either the screw or the nut.
MINOR DIAMETER-SmaIIest diameter of the
thread of either the screw or the nut.
PITCH DIAMETER- The theoretical diameter
that falls on a point where the thread width and the
groove width are the same.
PITCH (P)- The distance from thread point to
thread point measured parallel to the axis. Metric
threads are always ~xpressed in Pitch
LEAD-The distance one screw thread advances
axially in one turn. On a double lead screw, the lead
is twice the pitch.
NOTE: The same methods can be used in figuring
dimensions for American or metric screw threads.
I mm ~ .03937"
Pitch (metric) x .03937" x .758" ~ d epthofscrew
thread in inches

NOIAW.1HIEAD

MAJOR DIAMETEI
TOO SMALl. PITCH
DIAMETEI 01(

MAJOR Dil. TOO
SM.W.AND mCH
Dil. TOO SM.W

FIGURE 2~ You can get by with an undersize major
diameter as long as the pilch diameter is proper.
There will be a bigger flat on the thread crest and
less thread surface touching but the fit will still be
good. If both major and pilch diamelers are 100
small. the fit will be sloppy.
160

NUT
--1_- SCREW CUAItAHC(

t

.m,

DEPTH Of CUT
WITH SHAIIP
POINTED TOOL
4

SCREW

NIJT CLEARANCE

FIGURE 3-American National and Vilified Screw Thread/arms. These threads are cut with a sharp 60°
thread-cutting tool, and the threads do lIor have a flat at the bottom like rolled threads.

part slightly in the chuck, and really "sc rew things
up".

P ----+-I

Why have I made s uch a point about having the
major or minor diameter wrong and still making the
part work? Read on. You're probably thinking, "Joe
must really be a ' hacker ' if he can't cut a diameter
within .0 I 0"." Well , the problem, in many cases, is
nOI how close you can cut to a diameter, but what
the diameter should be.
A real life example
Example: Your buddy just heard you bought a nice,
shiny , new lathe complete with a screw-cutting
attachment, and like all good friends, he immediately
goes to work trying to figure out how you and your
new lathe can be of some use to him. It doesn't take
him long! He has a camera which he tried to repair
him se lf last year, but lost an important part. Of
course the missing part has metric threads, but that's
a "snap" for a 3" lathe. A quick check with a thread
gage indicates that it ha s .9mm pitch. No
problem ... yet. It is an internal thread, so you will
have to cut a screw to mate with it. Here 's the
problem: What is the major diameter? You can
measure the diameter of the hole, but you can't be
assured that the thread form is perfect and that this
is really the minor diameter. You can only assume
that it 's close. Now, you take thi s dimension and
add to it twice the depth of the thread, which should

o~ P'''I30· ~ P,O.866
o~

0.866
no. of threads/in.

FIGURE 4-Tlleform of a sharp pointed V-thread.
The sides of the threads form a 60° angle with each
other. TheJormufa shows how to calculate the depth

of the thread wilen knowing the pitch. In actuality,
tools rarely cut to a perfect point and a sligh t flat
will Dew!: The adopted stalldardfor this flat is about
1/25 ofllie pilCh.

it in exactly the same place. Howe ve r, the entire
chuck, along with the pan, could be removed from
the lathe to try it for size. Don 't force anything when
trying the part for size, because you might move the
161

the addition of an idler gear which reverses tool
movement so that it travels left to right.

An investment that pays off quickly
It's hard to appreciate just how much money an
inexpensive lathe like this with a screw-cutting
attachment can save you until you have had to have
a special part made that doesn'l have a standard
thread size. Even though there may be taps or dies
available, getting a single left-hand 1-32 TPI part
made would probably cost half as much as your
entire thread-cutting attachment.

It's easier than the books make it look
What I have tried to do in these opening remarks is
to show that screw cutting really is easy and to give
you the self confidence it takes to do any job well.
Too often, good craftsmen are stopped from
venturing forth because the only information
available shows the technically perfect way to do
things rather than the simple, practical methods
everyone really uses.

Two types of gages for measuring the number of
threads per inch on an existing thread. Thejlattool
has a thread count scale as well as a 60° point and
grooves for c
:hec:king thread and tool shapes.

give you the major diameter. To get the depth of
one thread , multiply the Pitch x .6. (Note: Pitch x
1.2 + Minor Diameter = Major Diameter). Total
depth of thread using a sharp pointed 60° tool = P x
.65 = .9mm x .65 = .585mm. (Or, since .9mm =
.0354", then Depth ~ .0354" x .65 ~ .023".)
The constant .6 is not used to figure depth of an
external thread; it is just one used to get you in the
"ballpark" in a situation such as this.

NOTE: The section thatfollows entitled "Culling A
Thread/or Practice" uses the example ofcUlling a
28 pitch right hand thread on a 114" diameter piece
of stock. The following numbers are based on that
setup. The instruclions that come with your thread
cutting allachment go into detail on assembling the
geartrain. I won't go over that here, but reading
through the example below w;{/ give you more
insight into how a typical thread is cut.

At least we have a fairly reliable place to start now
and can probably get one cut that will work on the
first try. Always keep track of the total depth of cut
in case it comes out undersized. At least you'll know
how deep not to cut it on the second one!

CUTIING ATHREAD
FOR PRACTICE
I believe the time has come to "have at it ", so we'll
start by chucking up a piece of aluminum and turning
it to 114" diameter. Let's cut 28 TPI on it. Be sure to
have a nut to check it with. Looking at the chart we
see we need an "A" lOOT on the spindle, driving a
"B" lOOT, which is attached to the "e" 20T. driving
the lead screw "D" 28T, using the idler "E'· 40T
that mounts on the swing arm. The gears should
mesh so they run "free" and have a' reasonable
amount of backlash. NOTE: All gear trains have
some "backlash" and it will not affect the quality of
the thread, but it does have to be allowed for. This
is why the tool must be backed out before the lathe
spindle is reversed.

The example I gave you was one of the more
difficult situations you may run into, not only
because you had to do the job for free to keep a
friend , but also because you had very limited
information from which to work.

Sometimes wrong + wrong = right
Usually, you will be cutting both the screw and nut.
This is a case where two wrongs can almost equal
one right. You can rectify any error you may have
had in cutting the first one by compensating for it in
the mating part. I don ' t recommend this as a
standard, but it may save an otherwise good part
someday.
leh.hand threads
Left-hand threads can be cut as easily as right-hand
threads on a Sherline lathe. The only difference is

Over 90% of the threads cut on a lathe of this type
will have a pitch less than .070" (2mm), and be less
than 3/8" (1 Omm) long. Now and then you may have
t62

2 FLAT WASHE RS HERE
CRANK'M-IEEL

PULLEY

"'" '"""""

FOR CLARITV

SPI NDLE

"""
(15012)

PRIMARY

""'"''''
".

FIGURE 5- Side view, thread-cutting attachment installed. (Hand crank wheel not shown fot clarity.)
GEAR

A

B

(

D

TEETH

100

100

20

28

taken with the crosslide being advanced to "clean
up" the thread. We can get the same effect by
moving the tool post. When cutting fine threads you
can get away with cutting "straight in". The crank
drive gives you the "feel" and a precise method of
stopping needed in single-pointing fine threads.
Cranking the spindle counterclockwise gives you
reverse. This allows you to cut the entire thread
without disengaging the leadscrew.

E

40

FIGURE 6-Setup for CUlling 28 Threads Per Inch.
NOTE: Idler gear "E" is used for right-hand
threads. Idler gears "F" and "G" are usedfor leflhand threads and are, therefore, not used in this
example.

Establishing depth o' the 'irst (ut
The threading tool must be on center and square
with the part. There is a small gage designed to do
thi s. If the tool isn't square, the included angle will
remain 60° but the sides of the thread wi ll be
different. The thread fonn wouldn't allow a standard
thread to screw on it. Establish the depth of the first
cut by bringing the tool in to the point where it just
touches the surface. Write the dial setting down or
reset your hand wheel to zero, and move the tool past
the starting point of the thread. Now engage the lead
screw lever. The leadscrew may have to be turned
while applying slight pressure on the lever in order
to get it to engage properly. DO NOT
DISENGAGE UNTIL THE THREAD HAS
BEEN COMPLETELY CUT. Now advance the
tool .003" for first cut. Tum the spindle counterclockwise, when viewed from the taiistock, until the
desired length of thread has been cut. Back the tool
out until it is completely clear of the part.

D LEAD SCREw

FIGURE 7- Right-hand geartrain setup diagram
for the example that follows.
to cut a fairly coarse thread (more than .070" pitch),
and it is a good idea to "rough out" the thread by
moving the tool post slightly to the left between
passes. This keeps the tool from having to cut on
both sides. On a standard lathe, the tool is advanced
by the compound rest which is set at 29°. This
allows only one side of the tool to cut and lessens
the load considerably. However, it also allows the
chip to damage the thread, which can't happen when
you are cutting threads straight in. For every plus
you will always find a minus. The final cut is then
163

Making additional passe.
Crank the spindle clockwise until the tool is at the
original starting point. Advance the tool to its last.
point plus .002". I've always found it useful to write
these dial settings down if you don ' t have rescttable
handwheels. It is amazing how fast you can forget

one! Now take the seco nd pass by cranking the
spindle counterclockwise. The amount the tool
should be advanced from this point on should be
governed by the amount of force it took for the last
pass. The cut will get progressively heavier each
time the tool is advanced . Remember, yOll can't ruin
your part by taking too light a cut. To figure what
the total amount the tool should be advanced if you
are using a sharp Vee form tool (standard form of
too l used in single pointing threads) simply multiply
the pitch times .758.
Example: Pitch of28 TPI
Pointed tool depth

~

~

A 114" tool usedfor cutting inside threads (left) and
a 60 0 carbide thread-cutting tool (right).

Double-lead thread.

1/28

P x .758

~

1128 x .758

~

A double-lead could be cut by picking change gears
that are one-halfthe pitch and indexing the "A" gear
1800 after cutting the first thread to depth. NOTE:
There isn't any way to check a double-lead until it
is completely Cllt; therefore, the depth must be
figured mathematically. It has always been fun for
me to do jobs like this, not because they were needed,
but just to see if I could do it!

.027

If you are not too good with math and don't like to
do it, just keep cutting and looking at the flat on the
top of the thread. When the fl at is 1/8 the pitch, the
nut should fit. Either way, check it long before you
think it is finished to be on the safe side until more
experience is gained. The last two passes should be
repeats of prev ious dial settings to clean up threads.
Not too hard was it?No matter what type of threads
you may cut, the basic method will remain the same.

,

"

Internal threads

Internal threads are very seldom cut full depth. You
don ' t cut internal threads that could easily be put in
with an inexpensive tap. Deep, small diameter
threading is next to impossible because the tools
become weak and springy. To figure the hol~ size
you should start with, take the pitch of thread you
are cutting and multiply it by 1.083 and subtract this
from the major diameter. To figure the total c.epth
usi ng a sharp pointed 60° tool, multiply the pitch
by.65.

.AD =
SINGLE

1128

~

TRIPLE

STEP 1. Tum or bore stock to proper diameter.
STEP 2. Remove the motor and speed control
assembly from the lathe.

.036"

Major Diameter - (P x 1.083) = Hole Size
1.500" - (.036" x 1.083)

DOUBLE

Areview of screw-cutting operation
Here' s a step-by-step summary ofa typical threadcutting operation. Once you've read the previous
examples, this should all make sense to you .

Major Diameter = I .S
~

lfAD :::

FIGURE 5-Single-. double- and triple-lead threads

EXAMPLE: To cut an internal 1-112"-28 TPI:
P

rf.
,

~

STEP 3. Install thread-cutting tool in toolpost holder.

Hole Size

STEP 4. Place tool bit at starting point of thread
and set for .003" cut.

1.500" - .039 ~ 1.461
Hole size = 1.46 1

STEP 5. Engage lever at base of lathe by turning
164

leadscrew support hand le clockwise. Turn lead
screw handwheel until full engagement occurs.

The first thing that must be inspected is the thread
form . The 60° incl uded angle has to be perpendicular
to the shaft. A thread fonn that has an eITor can "feel"
great when it is checked with a gage but only have a
20% thread contact. Commercial threads are
checked on a Comparator, but a magnifying glass
wi ll work we ll for an amateur. Threads will only
contact their mating part on their " high" points.
These high points can be quickl y be worn off and
the result wo uld be a sloppy thread with little
strength. Thread pitch diameter can be measured
with thread wires and a standard micrometer. A chart
converts the micrometer reading to pitch diameter.
Of course, thread wires are so ld in sets where each
range of threads has a part icu lar set of three wires.
Thread micrometers are manufactured wit h
interchangeable "tips". These tools cost too much
for home use; around $400.

STEP 6. Turn spindle crank wheel until tool bit has
traveled full length of intended thread.
STEP 7. Back crosslide out to clear tool from thread.
STEP 8. Tum crank wheel backwards until tool bit
has traveled past starting point of thread.
STEP 9. Return crosslide to its original position plus
.002".
STEP 10. Repeat STEPS 6, 7, 8, and 9 until full
depth of threads has been cut. Cutting oil will make
cutti ng easier, and will give a better finish.

Inspecting finished thread forms
Threads are inspected in a variety of ways. The home
shop machi nist will usually use another part such
as a nut or bolt, but this isn 't always accurate enough.

No_6 _ :lII6 TYPE A SHEET METAL SCREW

HEADSTOCK w/I'IJUfY
HANOWHEEL

EXPLODED VIEW

GEAR SHAFT (2) - - - ,
PRIMARY SUPPORT ARM -

--,

SMALL SHIM WASHER - - ,
2O-TOOTH GEAR . 24 PITCH
SECONDARY
SUPPORT ARM

1().32_5/8
SHCS

..t('''''''·l
SHCS

IO-lli3l8'" SHCS

FIXED SHAFT
28T_2~GEAR

NO. l0WASHER

'--- H"".

3IIr SHes

ENGAGEMENT
I.EVER

NOTE: Gear! shown are for example only. For proper
combinations see chort provided in the instructions.
(These are Ihe some gears used in the example on the
preyiaus pages.)

FIGURE 8-The exploded view above makes it easier to understand how the parts fi t together. Parr
numbers and gear charts for produCing a wide variety of threads are provided with the instructions that
come with the attachment.
165

as plating will reduce the pitch diameter after the
hole has been tapped. You can get in big trouble

Checking thread. in tapped holes
Critical tapped holes can be checked by drilling and

gauging a thread with a part with an unproven size
ifit must male with another thread that isn't at hand .
The parties must establish a standard between them
before any metal is cut, and the best standard will
be gages that are a little expensive but may keep the
scrap metal container from filling up. Once again,
these are mostly commercial considerations that you,
as a home machinist, will probably not have to deal
with, but their importance in the working world
makes it worth reminding you of their existence.

tapping a piece of scrap material and sawing the
thread in two. The thread can then be inspected. If
high quality drills and taps are used you will get
good threads; however. it might be wise to check
the final product if a large number of holes have to
be tapped. Taps can be purchased with several pitch

diameters and are defined by their "H" number.
Number H3 is standard in industry, and, the higher

the H number, the more clearance the thread will
have. Oversize taps are used when a process such

This custom-made lens adapter is a good example ofhow useful having your own thread-culling capability
can be. Jim Clark ofLakeside, California turned and threaded this aluminum ring to attach an anamorphic
(Cinemascope) lens to a 16mm projector. One side has inch threads, the other side is metric. It is unlikely
that an adapter like this could be purchased, and paying a machine shop to make itfor you would probably
cost almost as much as buying a threadcutling attachment for your lathe.

166

SEGION 1-lathe Operations

Chapter 7- Knurled finishes
The two types of knurls
There are two basic types of knurls available. One
is based on TPI (threads pel inch) and the other is
based on Diametral Pitch, which is how gears are

defined. Machinery's Handbook recommends
using the DP, but if you try to purchase DP knurls,
you will find that what is really available are TPI
knurls. The end result is most people use the TPI
type knurls because they are readily available and
less expensive. The Sherline knurling tool can only
use knurls that are 1/2" in diameter with a 3/ 16"
hole. These knurls are based on the TPI system.

Knurls for press 'its
When the specifications of a knurl are placed on a
drawing in detail, there is always a chance the
desired outside diameter can not be met and
produce a good knurl at the same time. The process
has too many variables to be that exact. You can ' t
get in too much trouble if the knurl is put on for
appearance or grip, but if the purpose of a knurl is
to control a press fit it may take some
experimentation. This can be accomplished with
simple test parts that can be pressed together and
taken apart. A good setup would involve tooling that
aligns the parts involved as they are pressed together.
Ifthesc parts are for a customer, the customer should
determine what is acceptable before the parts are
run. The OD of the knurl may have less impact on
the amount of " press" required when joining two
parts than one would believe. The shape of the knurl
at the 00 determines the press as much as the
outside diameter because a greater amount of
material may be displaced during the press. Straight
knurls have to be more carefully selected for the
job if they are to be used for enlarging a shaft
diameter for a press fit. In closer tolerance
production work special knurls have to be made to
accomplish this, so the finer the knurl the better your

STIAIGKT

This collet drawbar has a straight knurl while the
micrometer handle uses a diamond pattern. Each
provide good grip and a professional looking
appearance. The knurling process embosses the
pattern into the metal rather than cutting it.
chances of success. When you are dealing with "one
off' parts it may be easier to machine the part in
one piece rather than pressing the two parts together.

"Bumpn knurling

¥s.

a double knurl system

Most home machinists think ofknurling being done
with a knurling tool held in a tool post and the knurls
being forced into the part from a single side. This is
called "bump knurling", and it doesn' t work very
well because the work isn' t rigid enough to offset
the high loads associated with embossing metals. A
part that is only held by a short amount in a 3- jaw
chuck will be destroyed if this method is attempted.
It will simply get pushed out of the chuck and be
destroyed. To have a more reliable system for

A knurling tool used for "bump knurling " in a
standard size lathe. It is held in the toolholder and
pressed into afirmly supported rotating part.

30" DIAMOND

A straight knurl and a 30 diamond pattern made
with a pair of "left" and "right " 30 0 knurls.
0

167

production knurling, they designed knurl holders
with two or more knurls to balance the load. This is
why the Sherline knurl holder uses two knurls. The
machine was also too small to use the standard
knurling tools that were commercially available. We
had to design our own, and I'm pleased with
the result.

Mounting the knurling tool holder

The knurling holder is designed to mount directly
to the crosslide's T -slot groove. The T -nuts that run
in the groove should be tightened only enough to
eliminate play, but not so tight as to keep the holder
from moving freely in the groove. This allows the
holder to self-center on the part to be knurled. (We
recommend using aluminum for your first practice
knurl, approximately 112" diameter).
Knurling the part

The knurling holder manufactured by Sherline is
designed to be used only with the Sherline lathe.
The largest diameter that can be knurled is 1"
(25.4mm) and the smallest is somewhat dependent
on the pitch on the knurl. The higher the number of
teeth per inch (TPI) the finer the knurl will be and
the smaller the diameter that can be knurled.
Sherline includes a set of basic knurls (25 TPI) that
will produce a medium diamond knurled pattern.
This set is a left and right pair with a 30-degree helix,
with each tool forming half of the diamond pattern.

The part to be knurled or experimental part should
be running true with a chamfered corner at the end
of the section to be knurled. Adjust the top and
bottom clamping bolts so the knurls are lightly
touching the part without the spindle turning. Only
about half or less of the knurl wheel should be
nUUling on the part surface. Apply a liberal amount
of cutting oil to the knurls and have the spindle run
at a slow speed (approximately 500 RPM for 112"
diameter of soft material). Now start tightening the
top and bottom clamping bolts evenly, one at a time
until the knurls are engaged with the work in a
positive manner. Without loosening the knurls, back
them off the part with the feed handwheel. Stop the
spindle and carefully examine the quality of the
knurl. It should be full depth, clean, and sharp. The
finished diameter should be larger than the starting
diameter by approximately the amount shown in the
chart below. Ifnot, make the necessary adjustments.

Using practice cuts to produce a good knurl

APPROXIMATE INCREASE IN KNURLED DIAMETERS

Using the Sherline knurling 1001

A good knurl is produced by embossing; therefore,
a correct starting diameter on the work to be knurled
can best be determined by trial and error on a scrap
piece of simi lar material. When knurls are fonning,
they should be considered simil ar to one gear
meshing with another. Think. what would happen if
you tried to mesh a 25 -tooth gear with a gear that
had 62-112 teeth. This is in effect what happens if
the initial diameter is wrong, causing the tools to
take a second path every other revolution. This
produces an undesirable finish. The good part is that
knurls have an amazing tolerance for wrong
diameters when working with soft materials, and
you will have better than an 70% chance of success
on any given diameter.
Hard materials shorten

TPI

12
16
20
25
30
35
40
35
40
50

knurl life

60

Hard materials such as stainless and hardened tool
steels will make for short knurl life. Never attempt
to knurl hardened material such as piano wire.

70
80

TOOTH STRAIGHT
ANGLE

90°
90°
90°
90°
90°

W
90°

W
W
W
W
70°

W

.034
.025
.020
.016
.013
.011

.009
.014
.012
.009
.007
.006
.005

DIAGONAl DIAMOND DIAMOND
MALE
FEMAlE

.034
.025
.020
.016
.013
.011
.009

.038
.029
.023
.018
.015
.013
.010

-

-

-

.014
.011
.009
-

.006
-

.010
.009
.007

.010

.006

-

-

.0116

-

.005

-

-

-

NOTE: Ifno size shown, cutters/or that size are not available.

168

A knllrJing tool and a knurled part are shown in place on a Sherline lathe. By squeezingjrom both sides ar
once, Ihe pari is supported by Ihe 1001 itself during the knllrling process. This allows knurJing 10 be
accomplished on small parts that would normally defleci under Ihe load and require a lor ofsupporl.
169

If the knurl isn't full depth, take in on clamping bolts
with the spindle running until it is full depth. (If the

knurls are undercutting the finished diameter, the
diameter should be either increased or decreased by
approximately .005" (.lmm) until the knurls are
working properly.) Increasing the diameter will add
a tooth to the part. Decreasing the diameter will keep
the knurls from having to move so much material.
If the knurl isn't clean and sharp, use more cutting
oil whi le turning the spindle slower and increasing
the rate of feed .

Knurls (lefi to right): A straight tooth knurl, lefi hand
and right hand 30° spiral knurls.
KNURL SETS AVAILABLE FROM SHERlINE
STRAIGHT TOOTH ItNURLS
TOOTH
TPI/I
ANGLI
90'
16 TPI/251

As you can see, knurling isn't an exact science
because of the many variables involved, and that is
why we recommend getting good results on a scrap
part before attempting to put a knurled finish on a
part in which you have invested a lot of time.

30a SPIRAL KNURlS··

TOOTH
ANGLI
90'

TPI/I
20TPI/2lT

90'
90'

20 TPI/31T

90':"

25 IPI/381

90'

251PI/341'
30 TPI/401

90'

301PI/4lT

90'

35 1PI/471

90'

321PI/491

90'

40lPI/551

90'

351PI/551

70'

501PI/681

90'

40IPI/631

70'

80 TPI/IOlT

90'

411P1/651

and then feed them down the part for the length that

90'

471P11731

is to be knurled. Use plenty of cutting oil. When
you reach the end of the pattern. reve rse your
handwheel direction and back the knurls off the part
still using plenty of oil. You should have a knurl
you can be proud of.
A very wide variety of knurls is available from tool
suppliers and catalogs. The chart at the right shows
the sets that are available from Sherline for use on
the Sherline knurling attachment. Each comes as a
matched pair of knurling wheels.

70'
70'

35TPI/SST
501PI/791

70'

531PI/831

70'

60 IPI/941

70'

60 IPI/I091

70'

801PI/I25I

Completing the knurl

To complete the finish, the knurls are fed onto the
part using the leadscrew hand wheel. Start with the
properly adjusted knurl wheels partially engaged on
the part in the pattern you have already established,

NOTE: TPI ~ Threads Per Inch, T
Teeth on the knurl

~

Number of

• Included as the standard set with the purchase of a
Sherline knurling tool.
•• Each pair of spiral knurls includes one left hand
and one right hand wheel. Used together, they form
a diamond knurl pattern.

170

SEGION 2- lathe Operations

Chapter 8- Watch and clock making tools

A jeweler 's or watchmaker's lathe differs significantly from an engine lathe. Though very precise and well
made, they are designed for lise with hand held rools and machining is done "freehand".

and built their own projects and became ingenious
at building precision parts that had to work together.
They accomplished this using tools ca ll ed
"gravers" that were controlled by hand rather than
held in a tool post. The methods they used 50 years
ago were far different than today 's machining
technique and required more of a craftsman's touch.
Most watch- and clockmakers st ill use the same
methods today. Jeweler's lathes can also be very
expensive, sometimes costi ng several th ousand
dollars. I believe craftsmen who use these tools
enjoy making parts the old fashioned way, and I'm
pleased they are keeping this tradition alive and well.

A jeweler's lathe ¥s. an engine lathe
There is a noteworthy difference between a
"jeweler's lathe" and an "engine lathe" design like
the Sherlinc. A jeweler's lathe is a very specialized
machine that is really more like a small wood
cutting lath e than a metal lathe. Watch- and
clockmakers were also instrument makers and were
around before machining was a profession. They
built marvelous and l:eautiful in st ruments that
measured the angles used to plot the universe and
survey the landscape. What we call cloekmakers
were really the first machinists. They both designed

A hand held graver used
in c1ockmaking.

What's good for watch parts may not be good for
building a steam engine model
What I'm trying to convince you of is that a jcwclcr' s
lathe isn't necessari ly the best way or machining ir
171

Sherline watchmaking and clockmaking accessories

you are about to start on a complex part. A Sherline
type lathe is a small «engine" lathe. It can do
anything its full size counterpart can do. Ajeweler' s
lathe might be great for polishing shaft ends and
making clock parts, but it would make some of the
operations necessary to build a complex project very
difficult to accomplish.

The advantages of an engine lathe
An engine lathe cuts with tool bits clamped in a tool
post. Movements with accuracy less than .001"
error can be easily attained. The spindle can be
geared to the leadscrew for cutting threads. A
jeweler's lathe will have good tailstock alignment
for drilling extremely small holes, but it only has a
T -rest on which the hand held cutting tools, or
gravers, are rested. The machining is done
" freehand" . Mr. William Smith, who is a world
renowned c10ckmaker and designer, gave me two
days of training with a graver, and I found it a lot of
fun to use; however I wouldn't want to build
miniature steam engine parts this way. When you
are building parts for this type of project there is as
much work done to the inside of parts as the outside.
Boring straight, accurate holes can be easy with an
engine lathe but next to impossible with ajeweler's
lathe. You also can't cut threads in a normal
manner with a jeweler's lathe. Ajeweler's lathe may
be useful for clockmakers, but I would advise you
to select an engine lathe for building a complex
mechanical project.

Sherline makes a number of items that could be
useful to watch- or clockmakers who still prefer
working with a jeweler's lathe. Available are
several adapters to fit Sherline chucks to jeweler' s
lathes, saving the customer hundreds of dollars on a
3-jaw chuck alone. Sherline also offers c1ockmaker' s
gearcutting arbors with either # 1 Morse taper for
use on a Sherline lathe or 8mm and I Dmm " D" ends
for use on a jeweler' s lathe. IDmm «D" "pot" or
"step" collets for holding odd sized work are also
available in three different sizes.

THE WILLIAM R. SMITH T·REST
The Purpose of aT-Rest
This T-Rest was designed by world renowned
watch- and clock maker William R. Smith. The only
change we made was to eliminate locking levers
from the post and pedestal base and replace them
with 10-32 screws for production reasons. The same
5/32" hex key that comes with a Sherline lathe can
be used to adjust them.
The T-Rest is used to support a metal-cutting tool
called a "graver" which is hand-held rather than held
in a toolpost like a conventional lathe tool. This
traditional method of cutting metal shapes has long
been used not only by watch- and clockmakers, but
also by some instrument makers and model
makers.
Because the tool is hand-held, there is more " feel"
for the cut that is being made. Certain shapes like
ball ends and special notches or ridges which would
be difficult to make with conventional tools can be
done quickly and easily with this technique. It can
yield very precise results in the hands of one skilled
in this technique; however, a certain amount of

Collet pot chucks and gearcutling arbors are
available in sizes designed for use on jeweler's
lathes. Chuck adapters allow the use of 3- and 4.iaw ~%erline chucks on ajeweler 's lathe to increase
its versatility.
172

practice may be required for a beginner to turn
precise parts using this method.

Starting and making a (uf
The angle of entry of the tool into the part varies.
Start at about the part centerline and move the tool
up or down slightly varying the angle until you find
a position where it cuts best. You can pivot the tool
left and right using pressure from your finger to
swing an arc to cut a radius. As the leading edge of
the tool bites in, the heel rubs on the part keeping
the tool from digging too deeply. Using this method
you can achieve very subtle control of your cut.

Pre(autions for Hand Turning
Be extra careful when using this tool on parts held
in a 3~jaw or 4~jaw chuck. A graver which
inadvertently hits a spinning chuck jaw could be
dangerous. Because the tool is hand~held, it cannot
be held as securely as a tool held in a toolpost, so
use it with appropriate caution. The cutting angle,
sharpness of the tool, position of the tool point and
feed rate of the tool are all critical to how it cuts. In
a nutshell, when the angles are right, the tool cuts.
When they're not, it doesn't. Experiment as you find
the best combination and get a feel for the process.

leave This
edge sharp

I
t

MIN. DISTANCE

Tool used "00 edge" and pivOTed
To lUI 0 lodiu~ Tool «In 0110 be
used I10T 00 ~llide T make k
O
mo,
(omilTenT wTl mud. like 0
(onvenTiooolloThe (uning rool.
F
igure 1)

.JSH

~~~5~~·Break"TThe,eIlide ealiiy 00l iThehg lT~ wiTh a
hes Three edgel
I;
1T00I
10

·ReIT.

FIGURE 2- Metal peels from the edge of the 1001
when you find the right cutting angle.
I suggest you "break" three of the sharp edges of
your graver slightly with a stone so they slide
smoothly on the top of the T -Rest. If the edges are
left sharp they will bite in rather than slide.

TOP VIEW

FIGURE I- The T~Rest is set close up to the work
so that the overhang of the 1001 is minimal. This
g ives you beller leverage on the tool should il dig
into the part. (Tool is shown being used on ils side.)

Making your own gravers
Mr. Smith gave me a "crash course" on using gravers
at his home in Tennessee, but I still don't feel I have
the expertise to write complete instructions for their
use. Mr. Smith has kindly given pennission to use
his instructions on making gravers. We include a
copy of those instructions with the purchase of each
T-rest made by Sherline. He is a superb craftsman
and gentleman, and we appreciate the opportunity
of working with him on this project.

Turning Speeds and Tool Angles
Mr. Smith suggests a turning speed of about 250500 RPM for turning a small diameter steel shaft.
The speeds listed in speed tables for conventional
lathe cutting tools do not really apply to cutting with
gravers. The basic machining rule does still apply,
however and that is:
"If Ih e 1001 clwtlers. reduce speed
lllUl increllse feed. ..

Rake angle in (uHing with a graver
Rest the tool shank on the T~Rest with the point of
the tool on the top side. (See Figure 2.) Slide it along
on the bottom pointed edge, holding the tool in one
of the grips shown in the drawing in Figure 3. The
tool can be rotated and pivoted to be used in any
number of ways to achieve the type of cut you
desire. The tool should be raked downwards at the
handle end about 5° to 7° ·for cutting hard steels.
For softer materials like brass, the rake angle can be
reduced to near 0° to keep the tool from biting too
deeply into the softer metal.

FIGURE 3- Two methods of holding a graver.
173

With the addition of the W.R. Smith T-Rest. the Sherline lathe becomes aftrst class watchmaker's lathe.
When you' re done hand turning your watch parts using a graver on the T-rest, you call return to the
versatility of an engine lathe design for other projects.
Where to Get More Information

write him at: William R. Smith, 7936 Camberley
Drive, Powell, Tennessee 37849. His E-mail address
is: wrsmith2 @aol.com.

If you are new to the technique of hand turning metal,
I suggest you get more infonnation from Mr. Smith
or other experts in the horological field. He has
published several books and videos that show or
describe the techniques required. A list of his books
and videos he offers can be found in the Resources
listing of Sherline's World Wide web site. He may
be reached by callin g (865) 947-9671 or you may

If you are going to be making the precise parts
required in clocks, models and instruments, you will
find that the Sherline lathe along with the T-Rest
wi ll yie ld results equal to those you wou ld obtain
on special jeweler's lathes costing many limes more.

(Following page) A "skeleton" wall clock designed
by W.R. Smith does much more than just tell time. It
is a beautiful demonstration of your ability as a
craftsmall that will become a treasured heirloom
for future generations. Mr. Smith offers plans and
information on how to build this and other clock
projects. His address is listed above.
174

175

Either the standard vertical milling column or the multi-axis vertical milling column shown here can turn
your lathe into a very versatile milling machine in less than a minute. See the next chapter for more on
doing milling operations on a lathe.
176

SEGION 2- L,the Operations

(hapter 9- Milling operations on the lathe
Two ways to do milling on a lathe
Sherline offers two different methods to do milling
on a lathe. The time honored way of accompli shing
this was mounting a vertical slide on the crossl ide,
and Sherline offers a vertical slide for this purpose.
Many books that use Myford lathes for examples
will show this type of setup. The cutter is mounted
in the lathe sp indl e and the work is clamped to the
vertical slide, or vertical milling table. This allows
the work to be moved on all three axes in relation to
the cutter. One of the problems encountered with a
setup of this kind is that the lathe bed limits the
movement of the vertical slide. If the work is small
enough and you aren't concerned by this fact, then
you wi ll be happy with Sherline's vertical slide.
However, I would recommend the vertical milling
column because of its greater capacity.

Coming up with a good vertical milling column design
The vertical milling column was one of the first
accessories I came up with. I knew if the Sherline
product line was to be successful a method had to
be provided to do milling. I used several standard
extrusions used in lathe production, and I made up
the first prototype. It worked surprisingly well. The
dovetail design of the lathe bed was a real factor in

The vertical milling
table attaches to the
lathe crosslide. Parts
attached to the table
can be moved in three
axes, while a cutting
tool is held ill the
headstock. It is quick
and easy /0 set up. bUI
the size of the part that
call be machined is
limited.
this. The Hardinge toolroom lathe, which could be
considered top-of-the-line, uses a very similar
design. Most lathe designs don't have a good method
of holding the saddle to the bed. The saddle sits on
the bed and a small plate is used to keep the saddle
from lifting. Remember, cutting loads on a lathe are
directed against the bed. Milling loads can be in
many directions. As an example, consider a dovetail
cutter, which is designed to cut both top and bottom
at the same time. The angled part of the cutter wants
to lift the work and could lift the entire slide if the

A stalldard vertical
milling column or the
multi-directioll vertical
milling column shown
here can be illstalled on
the lathe in less than a
minute. The column has
the same "Z" axis travel
as a Sherline mill, which
makes it more versatile
than the smaller vertical
milling table. (See the
previous page for a
complete photo of the
multi-direction vertical
milling column.)
An optional crosslide
accessory plate is also
attached here to stiffen
the crosslide to better
handle milling loads.
177

bed had a standard design. Sherline put together two
dovetai l slides to make an attachment many times
more useful than the vertical table.
Mounting the vertical milling column
To mount the column to the lathe the headstock first
must be removed. Only one screw is loosened to
remove the headstock . The column is then mounted
in place of the headstock by ti ghtening a single
sc rew. The headstock is then mounted on the
column saddle by tightening another screw. With
the column mounted directly to the lathe bed, the
rigidity is excellent. The main problem is that the
cross lide was never designed to be used as a milling
table. It was designed to be as thin as possible to
allow a maximum diameter stock ofl.875" (47mm)
to be turned over the crosslide. Ifthe work is clamped
directly to the crosslide it could "warp" and cause
binding. I realized this when I designed the first
colum n. A workable solution turned out to be
another pl ate that is bolted to the crosslide that has
a larger cross-section, making it rigid and more
suitable for milling. The mill tooling plate can also
be clamped to the lathe crosslide. (See page 186.)

,

•

An additional cost saving advantage of modular design
The vertical co lumn presently manufactured by
Sherline has an additional two tapped holes to mount
it directly to the XY milling base. This allows the
user to purchase a mill one part at a time. You can
start with the vertical column mounted on a lathe.
In the future, buy an XY base. This will give you a
complete mill because the Sherline headstock and
motor dri ve is exactly the same for both the lathe
and mill. You now have a Sherline mill by sharing
the spindle/motor unit between the two machines.

,,
I

,

When to use a crosslide accessory plate
(See photo of previous page.) Milling exerts high
loads on the part being machined. A mill table must
be sti ff in order to keep from flexing when loads are
applied to the part attached to it. The lathe table does
not require this same stiffness and is made thinner
in order to provide maximum clearance to tum the
largest part possible over it. In order to stiffen up
the lathe table to better handle the stresses of milling,
an accessory plate can be attached to the crosslide.
This 1/2" thick plate also acts as a "tooling plate" to
protect your crosslide from accidental cuts from the
milling tool or drill. It must be removed when using
the machine as a lathe, as the extra 112" of thickness
will put the cutting tool 112" above the part centerline
in a standard toolpost. Also, the additional height
would reduce the size ofthe part that could be turned
by one inch.

Instructions for milling
Whether you are using a lathe with a milling table
or vertical milling column or a dedicated vertical
milling machine , the rules for millin g remain
unchanged. The following section on milling will
give you the details you need. If you are serious
about metalworking, you will soon find out why the
vertical mill is considered the "workhorse" in most
machine shops.

The standard vertical milling column (left) and the
column shown mounted on the lathe (right). The
column is mounted on the same pin that held the
headstock and the headstock is shifted to the milling
column saddle. The whole operation takesjust afew
seconds.
178

SECTION 3-MILLING OPERATIONS
Craftsman Profile- Augie Hiscano ................... 180
I. Holding parts for milling . . .

. ......... . . ...... 183

2. Mill operating instructions .. ..................... 191
3. Squaring up a block .... . . . .. . . . ................ 205
4. Using the rotary table and indexing attachment .. ... .. 209
5. Gears and geartrains .................. .
. . 2 19
6. Accessories for milling
• Horizontal milling conversion .. .... .. . . .... . 235
• Rotary column attachment ........... ... .... 237

This black /933 Ford hot rod roadster
looks real enough to be fired up and
driven off/he page, but it is actually a /1
25 scale model. Without the coin in the
foreground it might be hard 10 lell. It won

"Besl of Show" in the 1997 National
Championships in Salt Lake City. This
is Augie Hiscano 's most recent winner,
but hisfirst National Championship win
came in 1964- over 33 years ago! The
following profile on Allgie details this
car and his amazing career as an award
winning modeler.

179

Crohsmon Profile by Craig libuse

AUGIE HISCANO•••National Championship wins that span

Augie's shop is small
considering the National
Championships Ihat have
been generated here.
One of the trademarks of
Augie 's winning cars are
an abundance of custom
made metal paris. Thirty.
Ihree years ago he could
win with parIs made with
simple hand lools. Today
he credits his miniature
machine tools as giving
him the edge he needs 10
remain the best in his
field.

In 1991 , he received a mill and his entry in that year's
contest, a 1932 Ford Victoria hot rod, won both "best
of show" and "people's choice" awards . In 1993,
he built what he calls "the best car that never won a
'best of show' award" and finished second at Salt
Lake City. Detennined to build another winner, he
went to work on the black '33 roadster you see here.
H won the 1997 National Championships " Best of
Show" award. It is rare in any avocation to find
someone whose national championship quality work
spans over three decades, but Augie's has. He gives
a lot of credit to his tools and says, "Without tools
of this quality I could not have won in the 1990's".

t age 7, Augie Hiscano was already carving
model airplanes out of blocks of wood. He
went on to win contests in U·control model airplane
flying and eventually got interested in building and
super-detailing plastic model cars. In 1964 he won
the biggest national model car building contest ever
held; the Revell National Championships which
started out with over 500,000 entries. His tools at
the time were no more sophisticated than a Dremel
tool and files. Contest rules prohibited former
winners from entering again, so his interests over
the years moved on to building real hot rods and
going drag racing. He has applied his skills as a
craftsman to working on guns, model trains, cars,
boats and tanks and loves all things miniature. He
found ajob with Orange Blossom Hobbies in Miami
that keeps him close to the hobbies he loves, and he
has remained there for the past 33 years as manager.
In 1989, he was invited back to the National Model
Championships in Salt Lake City as a fonner winner
and special guest, where he was reinspired to build
model cars again. A change in the rules meant he
could enter again, but 25 years later the level of
quality had risen to where he could see his hand
tool s would no longer be sufficient to build a
winning entry. In 1990, his wife bought him a
SherJine lathe and he began making machined parts.

A

Augie only had two years of Machine Shop in high
school, so all he has learned has come from reading
books, talking to other machinists and just plain
experience. When he was young he built real hot
rods, so he knows what goes into a car, but now he
prefers working on the 1/25 th scale variety. He says,
"Today I can make my 'dream cars' and park them
in my dining room. "
Augie's plans include making one more run at the
national championship. With each car he adds more
detail and more difficult tasks to test himself. It looks
like Augie plans to be the man to beat in Salt Lake
City in 1999- thirty·five years after his first win.
180

over three decades
Project: 1125 scalc 1933 Ford Roadster

(Above) The side view really captures the style alld
classic hot rod looks ofthis national championship
winner. Notice the nice detail in the custom
aluminum wheels, the scra/ch-buill headers and the
cast brass valve covers.
(Left) A selection a/brass parts with afresh coat oj

nickel plating. The wires that held them in tht'plating
baths are still ouached. Augie does his own plating

to maintain control over quality at every possible
step in the process.
(Below) From any angle this car is a winner. The
boltom side shows the machined front and rear
smpensions, motor and drive line components. Even
theframe is mi"edfrom two pieces ofsolid material
and soldered together.
......

_-

All the parts you can see except for the tires are
scratch-huilt. The aluminum/roil! end a/the Ford
427 engine a/one took over 30 hours to machine.
181

The second printing of this book allows me the
opportun ity to bring you up to date on Augie's latest
achievement. In 1999, Augie went back to Salt Lake
City with his finest model ever for one last try at a
fourth nati onal championship win. He accomphshed
this goal in fine style, winning the "Best in Class"

(hot rod), " Best Engi neered" and "Best o f Show"
awards. Now a four-time "Best in Show" winner
over a 35-year period from 1964 to 1999, he vows
to retire from competition and spend more of his
time doing sem in ars to teach hi s sk ill s in
metal working to others.
I'IIDlOloW"U_

Allgie's 1125 scale
winning enlly for 1999.
He calls it a 1932~112
Ford roadster beca/lse
rhe bodywork combines
a laid-back 1932 grill
with a 1933 body. The
engine is a 1996
Mustang Cobra and the
suspension represents
the best in modern
engineering. Under the
nostalgic style of the
bodywork resides plenty
of leadillg~edge
technology that reflects
Augie's interpretation of
the future of hotrodding.
Though the photos don't do it j ustice, the paint job
is a mirror-smooth metallic dark green pearl color.
The '96 Mustang Cobra engine is loaded
with detail and polished metal parts.

The custom front suspension (left) and
Jaguar rear suspension (above) fea ture
working steering and springs.
182

SEGION l--- Vertical Milling Machine Operations

Chapter 1- Holding parts for milling
Metol doesn't cut like wood
If you have worked with woodworking machinery
in the past, you may have picked up some very bad
habits if you try to go about cutting metal as you do

wood. For example, on a radial arm saw, you can
easil y hold a large piece of lumber with one hand
and pull the saw through it wilh your other hand. If
you were (0 try to cut metal like that, the blade would
load up, climb up on the pan, break the blade and

send the spindle and motor assembly towards you
at an alarming rate. Metal must be held securely to

successfully machine it. The forces are so great
where the cutting tool comes in contact with the part
that only the best setups work.

Deciding how to clamp a part

An irregularly shaped casting for a steam engine is
clamped down for milling. The back was .flattened
slightly /Ising 320 grit sandpaper on a flat table to
provide a reasonably flat sUlface to start from.

When using a mill , one of the first dec is ion s you
must make is how to clamp the part in position for
machining. The method you choose to clamp and
align the part to the machine will determine the
success or failure of a particular operation. The work
has to be held securely to offset all machining forces.
The machinist has control of many of the forces by
the choice of depth of cut and the feed rate . How
sec ure ly the part is held down will determine the
machining force s that can be applied to it. If you
are thinking all you have to do is overtighten the
vise to balance this equation, you have never built a
complex part. Many parts have final s hapes that
don't allow a vise or si mple hold-downs to be used .
A special fixture may have to be built to clamp the
work to the machine tool. Whether one part is to be
built or one hundred, the work has to be properly
clamped. Light cuts will lessen the need for elaborate
fixturing. It is up to the machini st to detennine what
will work on the first try. A novice to the trade will
be tempted to mac hine a milling machine's table to
hold a special part. Don't. If your only sol ution is to
modify the table , Sherline ha s a tooling plate
available for just that purpose. Th e first rul e of
machining is to leave a mac hine tool in be tter
condition than you found it. Clamping the work to
the machine may take more time than the actual
machining. Learn to live with this fact.

to and the machining has to accommodate any faults
or irregularities in the casting. A casting cannot be
made to the same tolerances as the part that will be
mac hined from it , so it mu st be meas ured very
carefully to decide on a starting point. A casting may
have mac hining operations performed from many
directions, and the machining must be started from
a place that puts all the operations in line with the
cast ing. Castings for some kits may have a quality
that would make a bar stock version of the same
part easier to build. After compl etion, sandblasting
would st ill g ive the part a cast look. The casting
may have to be worked with hand tool s in order to
produce a s urface that is flat enough to start the
machining operations. The part may al so be epoxied
to something that can be easily clamped, machined
with li ght cuts and then broken free after machining.
The choices are endless.
To si mplify these problems there are a number of
standard ways to clamp the work to the mac hine,
and the method you choose will be determined by
the size and shape of the part and the operation to
be perfonned on it.

THE MILLING VISE

Holding (Qstings

Special design features address the demands of milling
Probably the most versatile and popular method of
holding parts for milling is the milling vise. The

Castings can be one of the most difficult kinds of
parts to clamp. They don't have flat sides to clamp
1
83

Ifyoujust purchased a milling machine and don't yet have a milling vise, you should consider getting one.
It will be the single most useful accessory you can own for holding work on a mill.
milling vise is different from drill press vises and
requires a little more effort to use. The main
difference is that as the milling vise is tightened,
the jaw not only closes but is also pulled downward.
This keeps the movable jaw from lifting if a part is
being held by the top section of the jaws. A cheap
drill press vise is almost useless on a mill because
there is no way to keep the movable jaw from lifting . .
F2

F1

The Sherline vise is machined square and has a
groove around its body to allow it to be clamped
finnly into position on a mill table. The vise can
also be clamped on its side and held to the table
with "hold-downs". The fixed jaw has both a
horizontal and a vertical "V" groove to facilitate
holding round bar stock. These grooves can be very
useful to hold bar stock to mill the end with the vise
on its side.
The advantage of the milling vise is obvious when
movement of the jaw is studied. (See illustration at
left.) The tightening force (Fl) produces not only a
force against the part (F2), but also a force pulling
the jaw downward (F3). Therefore, angle "An must
exceed 45° in order to make force F3 greater than
F2. This keeps the movable jaw from tipping back.
Also note that extreme clamping angles beyond 60°
there is too much downward pressure, but not
enough clamping force. Moving the pull-down

APPRO XIMATE ADJUSTMENT

The mill vise 's pull-down feature and the forces
involved in holding par/sfor milling.
184

There is a right way ant! a wrong way
to clamp work i1l the jaws (right). If
YOLl can'r cemer rhe work, keep the
jaws square by addillg a spacer the
same rhickness as rhe part.
machine. I've eve n seen machines
weighing thousands of pounds with
their T-slots pulled out. The same type
of people that pull these slots out wi ll
also pull ou rs out. A good craftsman
will deve lop a "feel" for mac hin e
work that can't be described in books.
I

Making "soft" alumillum j aws fo r YOllr mill vise
adds to its versatility_ Project plans show you how
to make them all page 32 /.

barrel to the proper position keeps the adjustment
wi thin the most effecti ve clam ping range.

To summarize. a good mill vise a1lows you to position
a part accurately while holding it very securely.

Clamping a part
The vise is usuall y clamped to the machine before
the work is clamped to the vise. Sherline vises have
a slot milled around the vise to accommodate holddow ns. You don' t want any ki nd of "alignment"
built into the vise. because many times the vise has
to be clamped o n an angle to the mill tabl e. To get
the vise square with the machine, the fi xed jaw has
to be ind icated in . (See illustrat ion on page 199)
Many times a vise doesn' t have (0 be exactly square
with the machine to perfonn a job such as fl ycutting.
Thi s is perfectly acceptabl e as lo ng as you remove
the vise fro m the tabl e when you are through with
it. Neve r leave a mac hin e vise c lamped to a
machine if it isn' t square, and never use a vise that
you d idn' t clamp down yourself without chec ki ng
it with an indicato r. If the work to be performed is
" heavy", it would be prudent to use at least three
clamping points. If the vise is moving on heavy cuts,
tryi ng to solve the proble m by overtightening the
two cl amps you are usi ng may damage the T-s lots.
As with all tools of thi s size, it is easy for the operator
to overpower it by overti ghte ning. The machining
forces appl ied to your pan by a motor as small as is
used on the Sherline mill do not requi re the same
cl am ping pressures as you mig ht apply to a part
being machined in a full size mill . The fac t that the
operator is physically stronger than the machine is
one of the basic problems working with any small

WRONG
RIGHT

To cla mp a pa rt , place the j aw in
SPACER
a pp rox im a te pos iti o n a nd s tart
tightening the adju stment screw at an ang le of 45 °
o r greater. (The back face of the moveable jaw is
machined at a 45 ° angle for reference.) If the angle
of the adjustment screw gets up to 60° or g reater
and you still haven ' t drawn down on the part, loosen
up the screw a little and move the pull-dow n barre l
to the nex t slot and reti ghten.
The ill ustration above shows the proper way to hold
a part in the vise, If the part cannot be centered, use
a spacer in the other end of the opening to help keep
the jaws parall el. In most cases, don' t try to ho ld
more than one piece in a vise unl ess they are being
cl amped to one another. A slight difference in sizes
wi ll leave one part loose , and it will move whi le
being machined. Again , overtightening can di stort
the part or the vise, and overtighte ning the ho lddow n cl amps ca n damage the T-s lots of your mill
table. Though you want your part securely mounted
for milling, be reasonable in the forces you appl y so
that you don' t damage your part o r too ls.

HOLD· DOWN (lAMPS
At least one set of these clamps should be considered
a necessity fo r every milling machine owner. The
set consists of two strap clamps complete with bolts,
T- nuts , washers and a variety of socket head cap
screws to accommodate parts of differe nt thickness.
The socket head sc rew goes thro ugh the slot in the
strap cla mp and into the T-nut which is in one of
the slots in the mill table. The carriage bolt goes
into the ho le at the other end of the strap clamp with
its round head resting on the mill table. It is adjusted
to the proper height fo r the part being held, and then
the socket head screw is tightened down to hold the
part in positi on. (See illu stration on nex t page .)

1
85

HOLD·DOWN SCREWS
COME IN AVARIETY
OF UNGTHS

so many diverse ways that they are sold without
holes for clamping. They are relatively inexpensive
and could be considered disposable for a tabletop
machine but not for full size machines because of
the large cost difference. A few holes drilled and
tapped in the vertical part ofthe plate can make them
easier to use.

HEIGHT IS (ONnOWD BY
ADJUSTMENT OF THE
UJlRIAGE BOLT

The hold·down set consists of
strap clamps, bolts and T·nuts.
Set up two or more strap clamps on the part to be
held and get them into position with the screws just
finger tight. When the part is properly aligned, use
a hex key to draw each clamp down a little at a time
keeping an even force on all points so the part isn't
distorted. If the size and shape of the part allow, it
is better to spread out the clamping load by using
more clamps rather than putting more pressure on
fewer clamps. (See also photo on page 183.)

A part clamped to a right angle plate is held
perpendicular to the table for milling.
RIGHT ANGLE PLATES
A right angle plate is simply a device that can be
clamped to the table which has a vertical surface
that is exactly 90 degrees to the table. It can be very
useful for squaring work to the machine and is
almost a requirement when working with the
horizontal milling attachment. They can be used in

A tooling plate mounted to the mill table offers
several ways to hold parts while also protecting the
table from accidental damage. Here, a mill vise is
used to hold a part. Notice Tim has custom·designed
his own shield to keep chips off the leadscrew.
TOOLING PLATES
Tooling plates are nothing more than a cast piece of
aluminum plate, machined on both sides, with a
number of holes in them. Their main use is to
protect the mill table, and Sherline's plate has been
laid out to accommodate some of the accessories
that may be used in conjunction with the plate. Cast
plate is interesting in the way it is made. Scrap
aluminum is melted on a pool of molten lead, and
the difference in their weights makes the aluminum
float on top of the lead. The temperature is then
lowered to the point where the aluminum hardens
and the lead is still molten. The plate can be then
lifted off and machined flat on both sides. What is
useful about this material is that it doesn't have any
built-in stresses that can cause warping during the
machining process. As always, you don't get
something for nothing, and that result is a material
that doesn't have the strength of standard aluminum.
THREE- AND FOUR-JAW CHUCKS
Sometimes a part held in a chuck on the lathe will
need an operation perfonned on it on the mill. The
chuck can be removed from the lathe, mounted to
the mill table, the operation perfonned and the chuck
186

returned to the lathe for more operations without
having to recenter the part in the chuck. Other times,
a chuck may just be the simplest way to hold a part
for milling. In either case, chucks are good holding
devices that are easily mounted to the mill table in a
couple of ways.

probably already have some on hand. If not, they
can be purchased as the 4-jaw hold-down set. These
clamps are held with bolts into T-nuts in the mill
table T-slots. This is a more secure method of
mounting and also allows the chuck to be mounted
in any position on the table, not just lined up over
one of the T-slots. Even if the chuck-to-T-slot
adapter is used, these clamps should be used to keep
the chuck from unscrewing during machining.

CHUCK-TO-T-SLOT ADAPTER

o

The fastest way to mount a chuck to the table is
with the chuck-to-T-slot adapter. This part is
simply screwed a short distance into the 3/4-16 hole
in the back of the chuck, and then the tab on the end
is slid into the T-slot on the mill table. The chuck is
slid into position and rotated on the adapter to tighten
it down on the table. A special adapter is included
with the rotary table to allow 3-jaw and 4-jaw chucks
to be mounted in the same manner.

•
o

o

o
o

Keep in mind that the chuck is tightened down
clockwise. Any counterclockwise forces applied by
the rotating end mill will have a tendency to loosen
and unscrew the chuck which could be disastrous
for your part. If you are using a 3-jaw chuck, you
can place a tommy bar in one of the adjustment holes
and mount a small block to the table to act as a "stop"
to keep the chuck from unscrewing.

0

00

THE TIlTING ANGLE TABLE
D.sign of th. ongl. plot.
To mill angles on a part, either the part or the cutter
needs to be tilted to the proper angle. The tilting
angle plate is a way to make it easy to hold the part
securely while tilting it to the desired angle. A
rotary column attachment is also available that
allows the part to be mounted square and the
column tilted to the desired angle, but using the
tilting angle plate means the vertical column doesn ' t
need to be realigned to square after the cut is made.
The angle plate attachment for the Sherline mill was
designed with help and many suggestions from auto
engineer and Sherline machinist Graham Taylor of
Livonia, Michigan. The multiple hole pattern allows
the rotary table or mill vise to be attached directly
to the table. Also included is a 3/4-16 adapter which
attaches to the table, allowing you to directly mount
Sherline 3-jaw or 4-jaw chucks to the angle plate as
well.

Mounting 0 4-Jaw chuck
The 4-jaw chucks have a groove machined around
the outside diameter which allow them to be held
down to the mill table with angle clamps. These
clamps come with a number of accessories and you

The Importance of mounting the plate
square with the table
The angle plate must be mounted square to the table.
The mounting hole layout should be reasonably
accurate, but for very close work, use an indicator
to square the plate just to be sure. The movement of
a plate tilting at angles can be very confusing. It
would be wise to consider how errors can accumulate

A 4-jaw chuck held in place with angle clamps.
187

you visualize an extreme case where the table might
be mounted 15 0 off from square. Picture the path
your cutter would make if you made a pass over a
part mounted that far off square and you'll see what
I mean.
Always make a sketch of your setup to make sure
you have the correct table angle. When using an end
mill, remember that the angle of the cut depends on
whether you are using the end or the side of the
milling cutter. The bottom of the cutter cuts the angle
indicated on the angle plate scale, while the side of
the mill cutter cuts an angle equal to 90 0 minus the
angle set on the table. (See illustration below left.)

Mounting tho anglo plato to tho mill or lathotoblo
The hole pattern in the bottom ot the angle plate has
been designed to pick up the T-Slots in the mill table
or in the crosslide table of the lathe when using the
vertical milling column attachment. Use the T -nuts
and socket head cap screws in four of the six
mounting holes on the bottom plate. Use the two
center and two of the end holes for mounting to the
lathe table. For the mill table, use all four end holes.
Mounting hold-down devices to the angle plate table
The hole pattern in the table of the angle plate has
been designed to allow you to mount any of several
Sherline holding devices. These include the rotary
table, mill vise, 3-jaw chucks and 4-jaw chucks. This
is why the hole pattern looks a bit odd. You can
also drill additional 10-32 holes to meet your own
unique mounting requirements. The following
diagrams show which holes to use for mounting each
of the accessories. As an additional feature, the
rotary table location has been calculated so that when
rotated to the 90 0 position, it comes out at the same
height as the rotary table tailstock, which eliminates
the need for the PIN 3701 right angle attachment.
(See next page for illustrations.)

A part held in the mill vise is mounted to the tilting
angle table/or milling. Drilling angled holes is also
made ea.~y using this accessory.
by not having the table square. If square, as the table
is tilted a given point moves in relation to only one
axis but not the other. If not square, it moves in
relation to both axes, making accurate machining
almost impossible. For example, you might start a
cut several thousandths deep at one side of a part
and end up cutting nothing at the other side. To make
this clear it is easier to picture what is happening if

"OOlll--+

30'

Maintenance of the angle plate
The angle graduations are laser engraved into the
stainless steel side plates so you don't have to worry
about rust or solvents. Do not try to polish around
the engraving. Though quite easily readable, it is
not very deep and could be removed in the polishing
process.

...
MltLiNG
CUTTER

The angle 0/your cUI is dependent on whether you
are wifing with the side or end o/your milling culler.
188

25" 4-JAW CHUCK

o
IOTAlYTABLE 0

o

I

Mounting pointsjor the 2.5" 4-jaw chuck.
Mounting points for the rotary table. Solid black
circles indicate holes used/or hold down screws on
this and the following diagrams.

3.1" 4-JAWCHUCK

o
o
o
MIll VlSl

0

Mounting points jor the 3. J" 4-jaw chuck. The center
chuck mounting adapter and 4 angle clamps are used 10
mount 4-jaw chucks very securely.

SOCKU HEAD SCREW

©

o

@

TOMMYW

o

l-JAW CHua

o

MIll VISE

I

Use a tommy bar to keep a 3-jaw chuck from
unscrewing during machining. Place the tommy bar
in one ofthe holes in the upper chuck body and use
a 10-32 socket headcapscrewasa stop. The center
chuck mounting adapter is attached to the platefrom
the bottom. After locating and tightening the chuck
in place, set the plate to the desired angle.

Two methods ojmounting the mil/vise (above).

189

Bob Breslauer made his own looling plale and slrap clamps to make special jobs like milling Ihe end of Ihis
brass tubing easier. He is using a ball end mill to put a radiused slot in the tubing so il can be soldered to
another piece of tubing to make a motorcycle frame. Using a well designed fixture like this makes it easy to
place another piece of tubing in the identical position so he can makefive model Harley Davidson motorcycle
frames. When making a number of identical parts. a little extra time spent in designing a good fixture pays
off in the long run as the parts are both easier to make and more consistent. (The completed motorcycle
frame can be seen on page 3 JI.)

190

lEGION 3-Mill Operalian

Chapter 2- Mill operating instructions

TABU FEED HAHDWHEEl
("'I" AXlSI

!ADDU FRICTION ADIUSlMENI S<REW

GIB
BASE

FIGURE I- Milling Machine part terminology. (Gib shown partially pulled out for clarity.)
Improving the way milling was done
on the Sherline lathe
When the first Sherline model 4000 lathe was
imported from Australia, there wasn't any method
for milling except with the vertical milling table
(PIN 1185). We still manufacture this device and it

is a method of milling on a lathe that has been around
longer than I have. The Myford and Atlas lathes used
this method for milling, and I'm sure that is why

about two hours to bui ld my first vertical milling
column (PIN 3050) using a column block and a rew
parts left. over from the first shipment oflathes from
Australia. It looked and worked more like a milling
attachment should, so I made a few to see if they
would sell. They did, and there was soon a demand
for the column, because it gave the customer an
accurate way of controlling the "Z" axis with a feed

Sherline Australia used it. The main problem was I

screw.

didn't like it. The lathe bed always ended up being

I still wasn't completely satisfied, but the design

in the way, and the limited movements were only
useful if very small parts were required. It took me

would have to do for now. The lathe wasn't even
into production yet, and here I was thinking about
191

what to build next. There were still way too many
problems that still needed solving in order to produce
the lathe. If I didn' t focus there wasn' t going to be a
tomorrow for Sherline. The immediate problem was
to have machines ready to ship to Sears. My first
employee was Darrell Porter. Darrell had worked
for me in the past. We got along well, and he was
always good at "making things work". His skill was
tested again and again as I brought old production
machines into the business. Between the two of us
orders were soon being filled. Darrell eventually left
to become a preacher, which was definitely not a
skill he learned from me.

that I didn 't even need a drawing. I headed for the
local scrap yard on a Saturday morning and picked
out the pieces of metal I needed without even using
a tape measure. I was on a mi ss ion . By Sunday
evening I had my prototype built. About the only
change that was made between the original prototype
and the production model was that the table was
made a quarter of an inch thicker than the lathe
crosslide material I originally used. The thickness
of the lathe crosslide must be held to a minimum to
allow the largest possible diameter to be turned over
the crosslide. Loads on the lathe table are also less
than those generated by milling. It would have been
nice to be able to use the same extrusion for both
the lathe and mill , but I could see that the mill
required more beef. The finished mill worked better
than I thought it would, considering its size. The
smallest size mill I had used up until then weighed
around a thousand pounds, and thi s machine only
weighed twenty-five pounds. Monday I ran a few
more tests to see if I could machine something to
size. If I couldn't make a part to size, how could I
expect a customer to be able to? The machine passed
with flying colors.

When you've thought about something long enough,
you don't even need to draw plans
With the lathe in production there was at last time
to build a mill. I had thought about it for so long

Why hadn't anyone else made a mill like this?
I believe the bi gges t advantage I had over my
competitors was I knew what it took to build things
both as a hobbyist and as a toolmaker. If I had only
worked as a toolmaker, I would have considered
making a complex part on a twenty-five pound mill
impossible. On the other hand, if I had worked only
as a hobby ist, I wou ldn ' t hav e kn ow n that
accessories like a boring head would be necessary
to make the machine usable. Items like fl y cutters
and boring heads were not available for miniature
machine tools at that time. This gave me a chance
to create a whole new market for Sherline.

The Ustepping stone" process of improving the line
Sherline manufactures a machine to build a certai n
size range of work. I wasn't involved with the fi rst
design of the lathe, but I'm sure it was designed to
compete with the Unimat 1000. Over the years one
sce nari o has remained constant. As soo n as I
designed a mill to build parts to complement the
lathe, customers wanted to build parts that were a
little bigger than the present lathes could handle. A
flywheel for a small steam engine would be a good
example. We solved the problem by making a riser
bloc k for the headstock so a bigger part could be
turned. Now a custome r wants a ri ser for the

Geometric puzzles like this are usually made from
wood. Joseph Piecznski of Flanders, Ne w Jersey
machined each of these interlocking pieces f rom
metal. The radiused ends add a nice touch.
192

tailslock. We make that and the customer produces
a part that doesn't quite fit on the mill. We modify
the ri ser block so it can be used on the mill as well,
and so it goes.
Designing a mill for the twenty-first century

full-size machine. the Bridgeport® vertical mill. The
machine would have to have more capabilities but
not a larger size. It had to remain affordable. It also
had to be a design that wouldn't make obsolete
existing equipment that had already been purchased.

As I have been writing this book. I have also been
working on a new design for the mill. Because it
will be the new mill to carry the company into the
year 2000, I plan to call it the Model 2000. A design
was needed that had all the features of my favorite

I took another look at a Bridgeport to study its
movements. The head was mounted on a plate that
would allow it to be tilted side to side. I had just
finished an accessory (the rotary column attachment)
that would do this, but the Bridgeport would also

The Sherline Model 2000 mill takes the product line into the year 2000 and beyond. With eight directions
ofmovement, it duplicates in miniature all the functions ofthe industry standard full-size mill- The Bridgeport.
t93

allow the head to be tilted in and out. This could be
accomplished by changing the adapter plate to a
" knuckle". The Bridgeport had this entire head
assembly mounted on a " ram" that could be moved
in and out as well as rotated side to side like a rotaryann drill press. I came up with a simple solution by
making the ram-slide out of a couple of machined
rectangle bars that are held together by a bolt running
through the knuckle at one end and a spacer at the
other. The bolt also locks the knuckle in place when
tightened. The column block has been replaced with
a couple of round pieces with a shaft running through
it. The shaft comes out between the rectangular bars
that allow you to lock the whole assembly with a
hex-nut and large custom washer. I believe it will
be a logical solution for our customers that are
always maxing out our present Model 5000 mill. It
will improve the present line of mills but not replace
them.
Drawing the line as far as size and prite
Many customers don't need a machine this elaborate
to accomplish their needs. Cost is a factor I live with
daily, and it is difficult to keep it in check. We have
one group of customers who say they want
perfection at any cost, although I find this hard to
believe. If Sherline machines were made with
hardened and ground machine slides they would be
so expensive we would have few customers. I don't
think there is a market for miniature machine tools
that cost several thousand dollars yet only work a
little bit better than what we now offer. There are
no plans in the future to manufacture or import a
larger milling machine because we would become
spread too "thin". This part of the market is already
covered nicely without my help. Sherline's future
will be in manufacturing more specialized
attachments for the current line. This will ensure
our goal of seeing that the parts built on Sherline
tools are limited only by size and the builder's
imagination ... not by complexity.
Going beyond basit milling operations
Much of the information on complex milling
machine operations can be found with the
attachments that must be used in conjunction with a
milling machine. Reading and understanding these
instructions can give much insight about solving the
problems that arise in the complex world of working
in 3-D. Again remember that speed on a milling
machine is gained by not making mistake s.
"Shortcuts" can be the quickest path to starting over.

1(T-AXlS)

2(T_AXlS)

FIGURE l-Directions ofmovement ofthe Sherline
ModellOOO 8-direclion mill. The design is patterned
after the movements ofaJull-size Bridgeport® miff.

General Description
At first glance, a vertical mill looks similar to a drill
press, but there are some important design
differences. For example, the spindle of a mill is
designed to take side loads as well as end loads. A
mill also has an accurate method of moving work in
relation to the spindle on all three axes. It is wise to
memorize these "X", "Y" and "Z" axes, because
since the advent of complex electronically controlled
milling machines, these tenus have become common
"shop talk", even outside engineering departments.
Feed screws with calibrated handwheels control
movements on these three axes. The handwheel
calibrations are quite accurate and should be used
whenever possible.
In addition to these three basic axes of movement,
other directions of head rotation, swing and tilt can
also be added for additional utility. See Figure 2 for
the movements ofSheriine's 8-motion mill.

The importante of keeping the spindle
square to the work
Using a vertical mill correctly takes more skill and
experience than is required for lathe operation
because of the additional axes and the more varied
type of work that can be perfonned. Cutters move
in circular paths; and when their axis isn't square to
194

the method of doing the ent ire job has been
established. The previous chapter is devoted to ways
to hold parts securely for milling. If you have not
already read it, be sure to do so before attempting to
make any cuts on your milling machine. The
following contains a littl e review and a couple of
additional thoughts.
Usuall y, a rectangular block can be easi ly held in a
vise. Note that round stock may also be held using
the "V" shaped slot in the vise jaw. Mi ll vises are
s
speciall y de, igned to pu ll the movable jaw down as
they tighten on it. Inexpensive drill press vises don' t
have the movable jaw machined accurately enough
to do any serious machining. When the work is held
only at the top of the vise jaw, the jaw will tip back
as the jaw is tightened. This causes the jaw to rise
where it comes in contact with the part as it is
tightened. It is possible to spend we ll over an hour
clamping and aligning work to perform two minutes
worth ofmachining.
Certain objects can be secured with a 4-jaw lathe
chuck. Work can be performed on a lathe and then
chuck and work are clamped to the milling machine
and completed. Some irregular shapes, such as steam
engine castings, may present greater difficulties.
Often they may be clamped directly to the table, but
they will need at least one reasonably flat surface.
This may require some hand work before starting.
Very small or irregular shapes can be secured by
epoxying them to a second, more easily held piece
of material. They are broken loose after machining.

I

!

FIGURE 3- The three axes of movement on a
standard milling machine

the surface they are cutting, they can produce
elliptical shapes. A trick I use to understand these
sometime subtle actions is to think in extremes. For
example, a spindle that isn't square with the surface
it is machining will leave a surface that is "dished"
oul when the surface is machined. This may be hard
to visualize if your considering the spindle only a
few thousands out of square, but if you think of the
spindle aligned at 45 degrees to the work, the cutter
path becomes obvious. The cutter would fonn an
elliptical cut. You can use this fact to produce some

Don't overtighten hold down screws. The end result
is bending the top of your T-slot groove which
creates a high spot on the mill table. Remember,
you are stronger than your machine with the added
leverage of a screw. The same customers who
damage the T-slots on Sherline machines would
also break the T -slots on cast iron tables.l have seen
full -size machine tools weighing thousands of
pounds with their T -slots broken by improper
clamping procedures. Never try to hold the work
with one clamp. The work can spin, ruining the work
and cutting tool and possibly damaging the machine
as well. Always use two or more clamps.
Use tooling plates to protect your mill table.
Although you can purchase tooling plates, they are
good rainy day projects, and they can speed up many
setups. Mounting a casting that requires many
machining operations on a tooling plate can save
hours of setup time.

very interesting shapes. (See page 203.)
Working within the capabilities of the machine
The machine must be well maintained, for it is
subject to higher stresses than a lathe. This particular
mill is one of the smallest being manufactured and
is an extremely useful tool. However, it would be
unreasonable to clamp a 3-pound piece of stainless
steel to the work table and expect to make a I-pound
part from it. Have a cutoff saw available to remove
rough stock. The key point is to work within the
capabi lities of the machine, and those limitations
can only be determined by the operator.

Se<uring the workpiece
The first problem encountered will be holding the
work and ali gning it to the machine. It is important
for reasons of safety and accuracy that the workpiece
be solidly secured. This may be the most difficult
task, since once the work is clamped in position,
195

Helplullip. for milling

or an end mill holder instead.

• The Sherline mill is a small, light-duty mill and
should not be used to remove large amounts of stock
which could be easil y removed with a hacksaw. For
efficiency, select a piece of stock that is as close to
fini shed size as possible.

• Fly cutting is an excellent way of removing stock
from flat surfaces. (See photo below.)
• Nonnal machine ali gnment is adequate for most
work, but if the work requires extreme accuracy.
shims may have to be employed to improve machine
alignment. (NOTE: The Model 2000 mill can be
aligned without shims.)

• Stresses o n a mill are quite high when cutting most
material s; therefore, gib and backlash adjustments
must be properly maintained.
• End mills must run true and he sharp. Holding end
mill s in a dri ll chuck is a poor practice. Use collets

• For accurate setups you should have and know
how to use a dial indicator.

FIGURE 4- Ajlycutter removes metal fast and leaves a good surf finish.
ace
196

• Often, more time will be spent making fixtures to
hold work than doing the actual machining.
• To help save time on many simple setups, a good
mill vise is a must.
• Remember the basic machining rule that says: "If
the tool chatters, reduce speed and increase feed."
• It takes a long time to accumulate the knowledge,
tools and fixtures required for many different types
of milling operations. Do not become discouraged
by starting with ajob that is too complex or by using
materials that are extremely difficult to machine.

Things to (onsider before you start (uHing
The following steps should be considered before
commencing any part:
• Is the material about to be machined best suited
for the job, and is it machinable with the available
cutting tools and equipment? Work with aluminum,
brass, plastic or cast iron whenever possible. Too
often a hobbyist will pick up the first correctly-sized
piece of material he finds at his local salvage dealer
thinking that ifit is rusty, it's steel, and that all steels
are pretty much the same. Not so! Anyone who has
ever tried to machine an old automobile axle can
attest to this. If the part must be steel, grade 12L14,
commonly called " lead -loy", is about the best

I

;,!)

material for machining. It was developed for screw
machine use and is available in round stock on ly.
However, it works so well that many times it may
be advisable to machine rectangular parts from it. It
can also be case hardened. Your local screw machine
shop will usually have scrap pieces avai lable and
may be a good source for obtaining it.
• A void exotic materials, such as sta inl ess steel.
unless absolutely necessary because of machining
difficulty and poor milling cutter life. (Probably , if
each new mechanical engineer were given a block
of stainless steel to mill, drill and tap upon his
graduation, stain less stee l sa les would drop
considerably!)
• Before beginning, carefully study the part to be
machined. Select the best surface from which to
work (usually the flattest).
• Pick a point from which to measure that wi ll not
be machined off part way through the job.
• Decide if work should be "rough cut" to size. Some
materials will warp whi le being· machined. Close
tolerance parts can be destroyed by attempting heavy
machining at the end of the job rather than at the
beginning.
• The method of holding the work is also detennined
by the type of machining to be performed. For
instance, work that involves only small drilling jobs
does not have to be held as securely as work to be
milled.
• Lay the j ob out so that it can be machined with the
minimum number of setups.
• Be sure to have all needed cutting tools available
before starting a job.
In summary, you should become aware of the fact
that milling is difficult, but not impossible. There
are many more considerations than just moving the
handwheels, and you should not start your first step
until your last step has been determined.
CAUTION! Because the tool spins on a mill,
hot chips can be thrown much farther than
when using a lathe. Safety glasses and proper
clothing are a must for ali milling operations.

Three types of work
There are three basic types of work that can be
perfonned with a vertical milling machine: milling,
drilling and boring. It would be extremely difficult
to detennine whether a vertical mill or a lathe would

FIGURE 5-Center drilling a part clamped to the
table with the hold-down set. The set includes
various length 10-32 screws for height adjustment.
197

be the most valuable machine in a shop. My personal
experience is that I've had to work with mills far
more than lathes. Theoretically, most vertical mills
are capable of reproducing themselves with standard
milling accessories such as a rotary table and centers.
This would be impossible on a lathe without exotic
modifications and attachments. A more detailed
discussion of each of the type of cutters used in
milling is provided starting on page 81 in case you
want to review .

a surface), I will write my handwheel settings down
followed by a "R" or "L", depending on the way I
was turning the handwheel as I came up on the
setting. Don't try to remember too many numbers,
even if you are good at it. An interruption by a phone
call could cause you to make a mistake that ruins
your part. The act of writing down a number helps
you remember it.

MILLING- Milling on a vertical mill is usually
accomplished with end mills. These cutters are
designed to cut with both their side and end. They
can cut the meat on your hands even easier than they
cut metal. They are not like drills, so give them
plenty of respect.

Another type of milling is performed with an
adjustable fly cutter, which may be used for
surfacing. For maximum safety and rigidity , the
cutting bit shou ld project from the holder no further
than necessary. A I ~ 112" diameter circle of cut is
quite efficient, and multiple passes over a surface
should ove rlap about 1/3 of the circle size. For
machining aluminum, use a speed of2000 RPM and
remove about .0 I 0" (0.25mm) per pass.
Remember that what flies during fl y cutting is chips.
HOI chips! You might want to make some temporary
barriers of cardboard around your machine to contain
the flying chips as much as possible. This will help
protect you, your other equipment and make cleanup
easier. Again, eye protection and proper clothing
are of particular importance during this operation.

"",1
FIGURE 6- Boring the inside ofa hole to exact
size with a boring tool held in a boring head.

1-_ _.>. '

DRILLING- On a machine that isn't equipped with
a quill, drilling is accomplished by raising and
lowering the entire milling head with the Z-axis feed
screw. Center drills must be used before drilling to
achieve any degree of accuracy. Note that
subsequent holes may be accurately "dialed in" from
the first hole by using the calibrated handwheels.
Each revo lution of the wheel will yield .050" of
travel or I.Omm for the metric machines. There is
no need to start with the handwheel at "zero",
although this can be easily accomplished with the
optional reseuable "zero" hand whee ls to make
calculations easier.

You have to consider the "backlash" when using
handwheels. When laying out holes, (or example, I
will only set my handwhee ls when turning
clockwise. If I am cutting a pocket (a shape cut below
198

BORING- Boring is the best method of making
accurate holes by rotating a tool with a single cutting
edge, usually in an adjustable holder called a boring
head. It is used to open up drilled holes or tubing to
a desired diameter. Boring accurate holes separates
the men from the boys when it comes to machining.

Machining angles and drilling angled holes
Angles can be machined by removing the headstock
aligrunent key and rotating the milling head to the
appropriate angle to the work or by holding the work
at an angle to the spindle. (Note: Lighter than normal
cuts should be taken when the aligrunent key is not
in place.) Many additonal milling possibilities are
made available with the addition of the Model 2000
mill which offers four directions of movement in
addi tion to th e standard X-, Y - and Z-axis
movements of the standard mill. Using the
movements and settings available with this mill,
parts can be machined from almost any angle.

To drill at an angle using a standard Sherline mill,
the headstock must remain in alignment with the
Z-axis to keep the drill movement parallel with the
machine slide. Therefore. the part must be mounted
at the desired angle and the drill brought straight
down . Vertical mills equipped with an optional
rotary column attachment can align the spindle and
the column to the work without tilting the head or
clamping the part at an angle. The disadvantage of
moving the column is that the spindle axis must be
" indicated" back to square to the machine when that
particular task is completed. (See page 237 for more
on the rotary column attachment.)

ij : -

. "':- -'
p

I

,

~II
:1

i

r

1
3

I

, ;(j
',

~

-~_ :.....
~;::~==
':O'"'-

~!!"".-. ~...

"

c~:;;~~~~
. ·

LP-=~~ .'"=~;;~~.-~2
-.~
-="
~
----1ffl~ <
.-:3j, ' ( ,.\ '

Standard milling vs. climb milling

~~

~ -' - '

To understand that the cutting action of a milling
cutter varies depending upon the direction of feed,
study the relationship of cutting edges to the material
being cut as shown in Figure 7. Note that in one
case the tool will tend to climb onto the work,
whereas in the other case the tool will tend to move
away from the cut.
The result is that
climb milling
should be avoided
except for very
light finishing
cuts. (For a more
complete
discussion
of
conventional and
climb milling, see
page 83.)

,~ ~

n

.

FIG URE 8- lndicating in thej aws o/a vise. Shown
is a Starreu "Last Word" indicafor. Starreu gages
are available in numerous sizes and types and call
be purchased from industrial tool suppliers. For
more on indicating in a mill, see page 253.
or .Olmm divi sions. An indicator with a large face
or one that reads in finer divisions is not necessary
for use with this mill. Three major tasks that can be
accomplished with an indicator are:
I. Checking the squareness of a setup.
2. Finding the center of a hole.
3. Aligning the work with the machine.
A vise can be mounted or a part can be clamped
down exactly parallel with the machine slides by
holding the test indicator stationary and moving the
slide with which you wish to align. When " indicating
in" a vi se, always take the reading on the fixed jaw.
To start with, use approximately .005" indicator
deflection from neutral. Remember that excessive
pressure can cause inaccurate readings. Also, try to
keep the indicator finger at a reasonable angle to
the indicated part or surface. When the part is
properly aligned there will not be any deflection on
the indicator. If you wish to locate the spindle over
an existing hole, place the indicato r in the spindle
and read the inside surface. Move the " X" and " Y"
axes until there is no deflection when the spindle is
rotated. At thi s point, the spindle is in perfect
ali gnment with the center of the hole .

FIGURE 7- Standardvs. ciimbmilling. (Forciarily,
consider the culler moving rather than the part.)

Working to scribed layout lines
A colored layout fluid called Dykem can be brushed
or sprayed on the surface of a part. After it dries, it
can be scribed with a sharp tool to make easily
visible layout lines and hole centers. You can then
cut to the lines in cases where accuracy is not critical
or you can use' the lines as a double check against
your handwheel settings. This can prevent mistakes
where you might lose track of your handwheel
rotations and dial in one too many or too few. A
photo and more details on using layout lines can be

found on page 97.
Use of a dial indicator
The basis of most accurate machining involves the
use of a universal dial test indicator; a small ,
inexpensive indicator which is calibrated in .001"

When aligning the spindle to used bearing holes,
remember that the hole may be worn out-of-round,
199

The squareness of your machine may also be
checked with an indicator. For example, the
alignment of the head to the table can be checked
by offsetting the indicator in the spindle. The tip
should move on a 5-inch diameter circle. The amount
of reading relative to the table is the amount of error.
Don't be discouraged to find a few thousandths of
an inch error in your machine. This machine has
been designed to have the most accuracy
commensurate with reasonable cost. In machine tool
manufacturing, accuracy and cost run hand in hand.
To increase accuracy only a percentage point could
dramatically increase the selling price, because of
the entirely different manufacturing processes
required. However, you can personally 'improve the
accuracy of your machine with a few shims if needed
by employing your dial indicator. For more on
squaring up your mill and checking table flatness
see page 252.

-FIGURE 9- lndicafing in the center of a hole.

The column bed is aligned with the column block at
the factory. If you remove it, it will have to be
realigned by mounting a known "square" on the mill
table and adjusting placement of the bed by running
an indicator on the square as the headstock is raised
and lowered. The same method can be used to check
alignment of the column bed to ensure it is square
with the "Y" axis. To correct any error (which should
be small) place a shim between the column block
and the mill base. (See photos on pages 253 and
254.)

and it may be impossible to attain zero indicator
deflection reading. Boring out a worn bearing hole
to a larger diameter and sleeving it with a simple
bushing mad e on a lathe is a fairly common
machining operation. With the new bushing pressed
in , the bearing will be like new.

Determining depth of cut
There are no finn rules other than common sense
for detennining depth of cut. A .030" cut depth with
a 3/16" end mill in aluminum could be considered
light, but a .003" cut depth in steel with a 1/32"
diameter end mill would break the cutter. Start with
very light cuts and gradually increase the depth until
satisfactory results are achieved. Try to develop the
skill of knowing how much cut is satisfactory
without breaking the cutter or damaging the work.
Note that regular end mills shC!tuld not be used for
drilling; however, they may be employed to enlarge
an existing hole. The cutting edges deserve more
respect than those of drill. Even though similar in
appearance; end mills are designed to cut with the
sides as well as the end.

FIGURE IO- lndicating in a head lill using a mill
vise and draftsman's triangle.
200

Some sample cuts with a mill
Just to see what would be a comfortable cut in
several common materials, I experimented a little

and came up with some figures using a Sheri inc mill.
These are just examples to give you an idea of what
you should be able to expect from your miniature
machine tools. In most cases, beginners have more
of a tendency to not feed the work into the cutter
fast enough. Remember that if your tool begins to
chatter or squeal, slow down your RPM and feed
the part into the cutter at a faster rate. (I know I
have mentioned this basic rule a number of times,
but hopefully if you come away from reading thi s
book remembering nothing but that, you will at least
have learned the most important rule in machining.)

The lowest usable speed is about 70 RPM , so we
use that in our specifications. To obtain much more
torque at the lower speed ranges, the drive belt can
be switched to the small er motor pull ey and the
larger spindle pulley. Therefore, in the normal belt
position, half speed is approximately 1450 RPM and
so on. You can estimate these speeds b y a
combination of the setting on the speed control knob
and the sound of the motor itself. If you are using
the new digital readout option, estimating speed is
not necessary . An electronic RPM readout I S
prov ided along with position information.

Unless noled, a 5/16' 2-lIule end mill was used for Ihe cui.
DEPTH
OFCUT
12U4 sl",1 .100'
6061-T
6.lum .150
7075 alum
.
.150
.100
B
rass
Stainless steel .025
Stainless Sfeel .025

MATERIAL

RPM
1200
2800
2800
1600
500
500

END MILLS (5101 and side milling)
MATERIAL

COMMENTS

CUT SPEED (S.F.M.11 /8" OIA. 1/4" OIA. 3/8" OIA.

Siainless Sleel, 303
Slointess Sleet, 304
Sioinless Sleel, 316
Sleel, 12114
Sleel, 1018
Sleet. 4130
Gray (osl Iron
Aluminum, 7075
Aluminum, 6061
Aluminum, 2024
Aluminum, (osl
8rass

use fairly slow feed rote
an easy materiol to (ut
resuhs equol to 6061-T
6
goad results
goad results
4-flute (utfer-betfer resuhs

FIGURE II - Some typical clIIs with (I mill

Work accurately
It shou ld be remembered that a good machini st is
capable of mak ing a part to much closer tolerances
than those of the machine with which he is working.
The accuracy of the parts you make is limited on ly
by your skill as a craftsman and the qua lity of your
measurement equipment. Accuracy shou ld be the
ultimate goal of every mach inist!

MATERIAL
(orban 51eel
(051 Iron, Soft
Sioiniess Sleel
(opper
Aluminum, Bar
Aluminum, (osl

Cuffing speeds for milling

SPEED ADJUSTMENT CHART
3.821 S.F.M.
SPINDLE RPM =

40

36
30
67
34
27
34
300
280
200
134
400

1200 RPM 600 RPM
1100
SOO
900
410
2000
1000
1000
SOO
800
400
1000
100
2800
2100
2800
2100
2800
2100
2800
2000
2800
2800

400 RPM
3S0
300
6S0
3S0
210
310
2000
2000
2000
1300
2800

DRILLS
CUT SPEED (S.F.M.I 1/16" DIA.

1/4" OIA.

2000 RPM
1800
1400
2000
2000
2000

SSO RPM
4S0
360
1100
2000
2000

36
30
24
72
240
120

FIG URE 13- End miJJ and drill speed cu.!jllslment
chart.

o
S.F . =
.M
R =
PM

0=

The rated Surfac F for M
e eet
illing. F
or
drilling, use 60% of the rated surface feet.
The rated spindle speed in Revolutions Per
M
inute
The diameter of work in inches

End mills
End mil ls are the standard vertical mill CUlling too ls.
We recommend 3/8" shank end mi ll s held in the
3/8" end mill holder (PIN 3079). One of the benefits
ofJ/8" end mills is they are available in a large range
of sizes. The end mill is he ld with a set screw on its
nat surface and it can be easil y changed. They are
lowe r in price than miniature cutters because of their
popularity. You can also use miniature series end
mills hav ing 3/ 16" or 1/4" shank sizes which should
be held in collets or end mill holders made for the

FIG URE 12- Formulafor acijusling spindle speed
f or culling a g iven diameler.
NOTE: To estimate RPM, remember that the speed
range of your vertical mill is from 0 to 2800 RPM.
201

lifespan when used for machining certain types of
steel and other exotic materials. Save new cutters
for finish work. Do not use small diameter end mills
with long flutes unless absolutely necessary because
of excessive cutter deflection (bending).

Rosharponlng end mills
End mills can be resharpened by your local tool and
cutter grinding shop. End mills lose their cutting
edge clearance after a couple of sharpenings and
should no longer be reused.

Drills and drill chuck
The 114" drill chuck available for this vertical mill
is supplied complete with a Morse No. I arbor and
a drawbolt to hold it securely in place. Drilling can
be accomplished by raising and lowering the entire
head with the vertical feed handwheel. This allows
for very accurate control of feed rate and hole depth.
For accurately located holes, I again stress the
importance of using center drills.

A selection ofend mills. The wooden block holds a
set of six different size 318", 2-jlute end mills. They
are double-ended so you actually get 12 cutting
tools. One is shown mounted in a 318" end mill
holder. To the right is a set ofsingle-ended, 3-jlute,
114" end mills. The flat surface on the side of each
end mill is where the set screw is tightened when
holding it in an end mill holder.

Drills should be kept in excellent condition, either
by replacement or proper resharpening. Get in the
habit of always tightening a drill chuck with the key.
Bits can't be held tight enough in a chuck if you
only tighten by hand, and you will ruin both your
drills and drill chuck if the bit is allowed to spin in
the chuck. Good quality high speed steel drills
should be employed. A dull or improperly sharpened
drill can cut oversize by as much as 10%. When
you start to drill, the initial penetration should be
no more than twice the diameter of the hole before
you retract the drill, clear the chips and add coolant
with the tip of a small brush. From then on, do not
try to drill deeper than the diameter of the drill
without clearing the chips and adding coolant. For
example:
To drill a 1/8" diameter hole I" deep
Total Depth
lst Pass; 2 times diameter or lW
1/4"
2nd Pass; 1 times diameter or 1/S3/S"
3rd Poss; I times diameter or 1/S1/2"

particular shank size. End mills held in collets must
be single-ended, while end mills held in our end mill
holders may be double-ended. We recorrunend using
2-flute, high-speed steel end mills for aluminum
because the flutes are less prone to clog with chips.
Use 4-flute cutters for cutting steels with lower
RPM . The solid carbide tools are not recommended
since they are very expensive and the cutting edges
will chip unless used with heavy duty production
equipment.
As a convenience to customers, Sherline keeps in
inventory many of the popular sizes of end mills
which are appropriate for use on miniature machines.
End mills may also be purchased from your local
industrial machine shop supply outlet (sec your
yellow pages under "Machine Shop Supplies") or
from mail order industrial suppliers.

Etc

You may encounter recommendations exceeding
this, but they are meant for automatic equipment
with pressurized coolant systems.
It is difficult to maintain tolerances of better than
+.003"-.000" with a drill. If tolerances closer than
these are required, a reamer must be employed. Try
to use fractional size reamers whenever possible
rather than decimal sizes, because the cost difference
can amount to 2 or 3 times higher. (The length of

Because small diameter cutters (less than 1/8") are
quite fragile, the largest diameter cutter possible for
the job requirements should be employed. Be certain
that the RPM is appropriate before attempting to
remove any metal. An end "mill can be instantly
damaged if a cut is attempted at excessive RPM.
Like all cutting tools, end mills will have a short
202

reamers may prevent their use for some operations on
machines of this size.}

(enfer drills
To accurately start holes. center drill s must be used.
They have a small tip which accurately starts the
hole, and then the shaft widens with a 60° cutting
face to the final diameter. Care must be taken to
employ cutting oil and to clear the drill frequently.
If this is not done, the fragile tip may load up and
twist off even in soft malerials. Center drills are available
in a variety of sizes, but for genera1 work we recommend
a No.1. For a chart of commonly available center drill
sizes, see page 65.
Horizontal Milling
A number of milling operations require the alignment of
the cutting tool from the side rather than from the top.
On a Sherline mill, the headstock can be rotated 90° to
accomplish this. To take full advantage of the capacity
of the table. a horizontal milling conversion accessory
is available. A 3/4" thick aluminum base 10.5" x 12.5"
allows the mill column to be mounted separately from
the base for a variety of milling configurations. The
headstock is rotated 90° and work is machined from
the side, allowing larger surfaces to be worked on
without having to reclamp the work. For more on use
of the horizontaJ milling conversion. see page 235.
Adigifal readouf/RPM gage lor fhe mill
A joint venture between John Wettroth and Sherline
was completed in 1998. (See page 98 for a photo of
the digitaJ readout option forthe mill.) With this unit you
can keep track of table movements. back1ash and spindle
RPM. The readout can be reset to "0" with the push of
a bunon. It also keeps track of long table movements
without the operator having to count handwheel
revolutions. The accuracy of the SherlineIWettroth
D.R.O. is based on the leadscrew and is not based on
external scales like the professional models costing over
a thousand dollars. However. this unit is priced to be
affordable and is very useful. To manufacture an item at
a cost that we considered affordable, we had to invent
an entirely different method to drive the readout. John
did a remarkable job to design a reliable system using
inexpensive components, and as a bonus came up with
a way to provide spindle RPM that only added a small
amount to the cost. Design problems always revol ve
around weight, cost and size. The answers to these
problems are always a compromise. We ha ve

compromised little in this D.R.O. design when compared
to the full-size counterparts. and we are quite proud of
the level of sophistication this option adds to our line of
small machine tools.

Acomputer controlled
rotary table is added to the lin e
1998 was a busy year at Sherline, and a self-contained,
computer-controlled rotary table indexer was in the final
stages of the design process. It was designed with
clockmakers in mind. It is time forclockmakers to enter
the next century with a new and sensible method of
cutting clock gears that doesn' t use expensive index
plates. This new product is not just for clockmakers,
however. Anyone who uses a rotary table for indexing
will find the computer controls make it even more useful.
Though this product has now been on the market for
several years, during the early printings of thi s book I
didn 't want to give details until I was positive we could
accomplish it. I have made a mi stake in the past by
showing customers a new project before it has been
completed. I have found that just because I can visualize
what the completed project may look like by looking at
a mock-up, the person being shown the new product
doesn't necessarily see the same thing. In the past I
have heard through the "grapevine" that the new product
we were about to introouce had flaws even though the
project hadn' t yet been completed. These rumors could
only have come about from showing a product that
wasn't in a package with instructions and had a price
established. From this I have learned, "Don' t show new
ideas until you are satisfied they have been completed."

A mill alollg with its mallY available accessories
call cut almost any shape imaginable. Here is all
iflterestillg se ries of cuts. How would you have set
lip to make them ? Think about it before YOIl turn the
page to see the setup that cut this part.

The CNC rotary indexer is now in production and has
achieved wide acceptance in the machining market
Much to my satisfaction it is now gaining acceptance
with the new generation of clockmakers at; well. Expert
clockmaker William R. Smith has even included a
demonstmtion of its use in oneofhis latest instructional
videos and is a big proponent of its use for cutting clock
gears. A photo of the CNC rotary indexer can be seen
on page 234.
Geffing creative with your setups

Throughout thi s book I have tried to include a number
of photos of different setups using the mill. Your unique
requirements may demand some creative thinking when
it comes to a part icul ar setup. The setup shown below

is a good example. The art of using a mill is in creating
good setups that hold the part securely and allow the
needed opemtions to be perfonned in a logica1 sequence.
I have been doing thi s for many years, but I still find I
come up against problems that I am solving for the first
time. That 's what keeps it interesting. Machine
adjustments, cutting tools and holding devices can be
combined in an infinite variety of ways todo whatever
job you need done. It 's just a matter of considering
each problem and then choosing the best methods and
combinations of tool s needed to accompli sh it. If thi s
type of challenge appeals to you, your miniature machine
shop will bring you many, many hours of pleasure.

The turbine-like shape Oil the previous page was Cllt IIsing a jlyclluer. By offsetting a beveled part on a
tilting Wigle table {//u/ rotating iI wilh Ihe rotary table. a series of illdexed Clils was made. Th e ctln/ed path
of the jlyculfer combilled with the tilted axis of the part gives a spiral Clil. The multi-direction mill coilimn
attachmellt al/ows the column to be offset to the side to provide ellough rooll/for the space takell lip by the
acces.wries in the serup. This cOlI/plicated sefllp iffustrates how a lIulllber of accessories call be combined
to achieve virtually ally cut you \IIould ever need to lIIake ill a miniature part.

SEGION 3- V
ertical M M
illing achine Operations

(hapter 3- Squaring up a block
A standard machining job that is perfonned with a
vertical mill would be: taking a sawed block of
material and squaring all six sides to one another.
These written instructions may make this look like
a bigger project than it reall y is, but it is important
to have square surfaces before starting on ajob. We
want to take fu ll advantage of the squareness of the
machine and vise to accomplish this. An angle plate
is helpful when machining larger pieces that would
be difficult to hold in the vise. Any time you are
working with a piece of material of unknown
squareness, you will need to fo llow some or all of
these procedures to get the critical sides parallel and
perpendicular before bringing them to fina l size.

Start with a square machine
Befo re starting, make sure your mi ll column is
aligned properly and the spindle is perpendicular to
the mill table. Instruct ions on squaring up your mill
are included in Section 4, Chapter 2. Make sure the
vise is mounted flat on the table with no chips under
it and that it is "indicated in" square with the mi ll
table. (See figure 8, page 199.)

Fly (u"ing Ihe 'irsl lIallide
First, try to saw out your block so it has one
reasonably flat side from which to start working. If
this isn't possible, fly cut a flat side opposite the
flattest side.lfthe part is small enough to be clamped
in the Sherline vise, a ball-shaped piece of stock
should be used between the movable jaw and the
work. This will hold the work against the fixed jaw
even if it is not perfectly flat, but it should be flat
enough to be held finnly while it's fly cut. Take light
ClItS until you have a flat side.

If you are sloppy about these first operations, you
may end up with your block having a cross section
that is more of a parallelogram than a rectangle when
you are done, so work carefull y.
SIDE 2
SIDE I

--

_,I'

iEiI

FIGURE 2- With thejlat side against thefixedjaw.
cut a second side perpendicular to side 1.

Fly cuHing the second side square to the first
Take the surface you just machined and put it against
the fixed jaw with the side that was previously
against the fixed jaw facing up and clamp it up in
the vise. The ball shou ld again be used to provide
even pressure against the fixed jaw. The work should
be fl at against the bottom of the vise or, if too small,
shimmed with a "parallel". (A parallel is a bar whose
sides are known to be parallel with each other.) Don't
tap the part down against the vise, because the fixed
jaw of the vise is the only surface to be concerned
with at this time. We want to remove the minimum
amount of material to get the second surface square
with the first. If you didn't allow much material to
machine, you could find the fourth side will not clean
up if you clamped up the part crooked at this point.
SIDE 3
SIDE I

SIDE I

-;::::::;::Ir--'~

--;=::;:Ir-L-,

n--... .

I 2

;:::;=r-''-l, n-'_All, '.PACER

FLAmS SID
T E

FIGURE I- Taking afirsl cut to gel one sidejlal.

FIGURE 3- Keep side 1 against thefixedjaw and
flip the part end-for-end 10 machine side 3 parallel
to side 2.

What we are trying to accomplish is to get two sides
square (perpendicular) to one another, and the vise
is accurate enough to get these first two sides square.

At this point t he first two sides s hou ld be
perpend icular to each other. The third side is next.

205

Fly (uHing the third side

Flip the part overend-for-end, keeping the same side
against the vise. Keep the second machined surface
down against the bottom of the vice or parallel and

and if you believe there is any possibility that it has
moved, check it before going on. This is where we
will use the squareness of the machine to produce
the fifth side which is perpendicular to the other four.
An end mill will be used to machine a small portion
of one end.

nycut the third side. I stiII wouldn't try to take it to
a final size on this operation. Once the block is
square it can be easily be machined to size.
SIDE 3

I 4

SIDE 2

S
MACHINED
IEFElENCE
SURFACI

FIGURE 4- Remove the ball and machine side 4
parallel to side l.

FIGURE 6-Mount the part to an angle block with
the reference surface resting on a "parallel" 10 make
sure it is aligned with the mill table's surface. (If
the block is short, the mill vise can be used instead
of an angle bloclc)

Fly (uning the fourth ,ide
The fourth side is easy and can be clamped in the
vise with the fourth side up. 'The ball will no longer
be needed as the sides being clamped are now
parallel. Errors will come from the fixed vise jaw
not being perfectly aligned with the machine or the
spindle not being square with the part.

If the part is too big to stand vertically in the vise, it
should be mounted to an angle plate. I am also
assuming that the block is too thick to machine it
using the side of an end mill. Fly cutters leave an
excellent finish to use as the job progresses. Once a
pass is made with an end mill the part can be clamped
to the angle plate with the portion we just machined
supported by a parallel. Again the flycutter is used
to machine the top surface flat and square. Then the
part is flipped to machine the last side. It is up to the
machinist to decide when to bring it to its final
dimension. I've had enough experience to realize it
doesn't pay to machine a block to its final size until
you are positive the time has come. I have had times
when I sure could have used that extra material I
had already machined off

IUlRENCE SURFACE

SIDE6

SIDE S

FIGURE 5- With the vise indicated in square to
the milllable, use an end mill to cut a small reference
surface on one end ofthe block.

FIGURE 7- The parI isflipped over and the final
side is machined.

The final two steps finish sides five and six
The fifth side is started without removing the part
from the vise. The vise should have been accurately
"indicated in" when it was first clamped to the table,

Aquick summary of what we did
To summarize, we used the fixed jaw to get one
side flat. We then put that machined surface against
206

The part was clamped vertically against a right angle
plate which held it square in one direction while the
second direction was controlled by using a paraliel
to align it with the mill table. Finally, the last side
was cut parallel to the fifth side.

the jaw and got a second side square to it. The third
side was cut with the same side against the fixed
jaw and the part flipped. The fourth side was cut by
simply holding the part square in the vise. To get
the last two ends square with the other four sides
we machined a small flat to use for our final cuts.

Brass ship 's cannons are among the ]lrst things many hobbyists visualize making when they consider
purchasing miniature machine tools. Here is a selection ojcannons donated to Sherline to display in their
factory showroom. These relatively simple projects make a nice desktop or shelf display. A coal of clear
fillish like acrylic laquer keeps the bright brass color from tarnishing.
207

More on Phil MaHson's
ship models_

... ~
,"

,, " '.:::
'

!~~~

.....

-- .
.
='~.
"

These photos show an example of how

Phil Mattson of La Jolla, California
builds miniature ship's cannons. The
frame parts were milled in a long section of bloodwood and then cut to width. Each canon is made up of
many pieces. The cannons are to be included in a model of the British warship Alfred which Phil is now
building. Each aithe 74 cannons is completed to the same level of quality and detail.

Phil Mattson's model a/the sailboat Sintra utilized
many small machined parts to model the anchor
winch on the foredeck and many other details like
the turnbuckles, pulleys and winches on the masts.

208

SEmON 3- Vertical Milling Machine Oper,ti,ns

Chapter 4- The rotary table and indexing head

A rotary table is set up on the mill to machine a special helicopter pari. Adding a rotary axis to a vertical
mill gives you a combination of tools thai can Iheorelically reproduce themselves. Parts made with this
combination are limited only by size and your imagination, not by their complexity.

This is the way rotary tables have been defined since
their conception; i.c., diameter and reduction. I used

THE ROTARY TABLE
Sherline Products' rotary table is 4" ( IOOmm) in
diameter and has been designed to be used in
conjunction with their vertical mills; however, it can
be easi ly adapted to any equipment where size and
configuration would make it useful. It has a worm
rat io of 72 -to-1 making one revolution of the
hand wheel equal to 5° of table rotation. The table
has been engraved with 5° lines identified every 15°,
and the hand wheel has 50 graduations making each
graduation 1/ 10°. This allows a circle to be divided
into 3600 parts without interpolating. The table can

the 72-to-1 ratio to keep the worm gear w ith the
largest pitch diameter I cou ld usc and still have it
centered under the spindle. This also wo rked out in
such a way we could use o ur standard inch
handwheels to drive it. 50 or .050" is the same. It
takes 72 revolutions of the hand wheel to turn the
table, but who's in a hurry when working at home?
Actuall y, I knew my customers would be cutting
gears with the Sherline rotary table and I wanted to
bui ld in as much accuracy as I could. The more turns,
the greater the accuracy. The other side of this coin
is, the more turns, the weaker the gear train. This

be locked.
209

happens because a higher reduction will need smaller
gear teeth to fit in the same space. This isjust another
example of an engineering compromise that good
engineers are faced with daily.

The right angle
attachment holds
the rotary table
(shown with
dOlled lines) in a
vertical position.
The base mounts
to the mill table
using the T-nuts
and socket head
screws prOVided.

,I
Design of a rotary table
All rotary tables have a worm gear driven by a worm.
This system creates a very high reduction with very
few parts-only two. The other advantage ofa worm
drive is that it can't be driven backwards. This fact
is very important because a milling cutter could
engage with the work and spin the rotary table. It
happens just like two gears meshing with one
another, and this would be very dangerous.
The T -slots on the rotary table are the same as those
on the milling table so that the same clamps and
fixtures can be used on either. Once again, this is an
example of how we have attempted to remain true
to the original design goals of maximum versatility
for Sherline tools and accessories. Actually, I am
not trying to sell you a rotary table, but I am
attempting to teach you the logic I use in designing
products. Notice I said "design". The word "invent"
is much overused today. You invent a laser; you
design a can opener.
Remember that virtually any hole layout can be done
with a standard mill. With very little knowledge of
trigonometry and a $15 calculator, you can calculate
the XY positions of any hole closer than you can
machine it. Trigonometric tables and fonnulas are
included in Machinery's Handbook A sample
project using the trig tables to help you layout a
hole pattern is included in Section. 5, Chapter 3 in
case you want to learn more or just brush up.
Mounting the rotary table to the mill table
The Sherline rotary table can be mounted to a mill
in several ways. The most common use would be to
210

clamp it directly to the mill table. A right angle
attachment is available to allow the rotary table to
be mounted vertically. The tilting angle table
attachment also is drilled and tapped to accept the
rotary table. Ifbrought to a vertical position while
mounted to the tilting angle plate, the center will
align with the adjustable right angle tailstock center.
This will allow a part to be turned between centers
using the rotary table without having to buy a right
angle attachment. Although the tilting angle table
is about $50 more than the right angle attachment,
it does offer many more setup possibilities because
it can be fixed at any angle from 0 0 to 900 • The right
angle attachment, on the other hand, is a simple
device that locates the rotary table quickly and
accurately at exactly 90 0 without having to be
indicated in. The choice is yours.

Adjustable right angle tailstock
The optional Sherline adjustable right angle tailstock
allows for accurate turning between centers when
the optional right angle attachment is used. Because
of tolerance buildup, it would be just about

impossible to orrer a tailstock that was perrectly on
center with the rotary tablelright angle attachment
combination. The solution orfered here is a
modification of the standard tailstock which allows
it to be adjusted to line up precisely with the center
of the rotary table in order to allow for perfect
alignment betwccn thc rotary table and the tailstock
while holding long parts between centers. The base
is attached to the mill table with cap screws and
T -nuts. Two socket head cap screws go through
elongated slots in the side of the right angle piece
and allow for minor adjustments in height when
making your setup.

An example of a rotary table job
The following instructions have been written to
show what's involved in doing a complex job
accurately. I believe if you truly understand the job
I will describe in detail, average jobs will be
accomplished without filling your trash can with
mistakes. Remember, there are not many people
capable of making the complex machined products

used today , and if you can master the vertical mill
and the rotary table combination, you will have come
a long way toward becoming a good machinist. You
will find erasers aren' t much good and no one has
come up with a good "putting on" tool when it comes
to metal parts. Complex parts arc very difficult to
make. When you ' re making onc-of-a-kind parts,
don't worry how long it takes ; spend your time
planning and checking so you don ' t have to worry
about starting over.

Amachine combination capable of reproducing itself
When a rotary table is put on a vertical mill you end
up with a machine that is theoretically capable of
reproducing itself. This means the capabilities of
your miniature mill are governed by the size of the
part and the ingenuity of the operator. The purpose
of these instructions is to give you an insight into
the proper use of this accessory. An inexpensive
calculator with trigonometric functions is a must for
complex jobs.

A setup with the tilting angle table holding the rotary table at 30° while a bevel gear is cut. When rotated
to the 90° pOSition, the tilting angle table puts the rotary table at the proper height [0 align with the
adjustable right angle tai/stock, which allows a shaft to be rotated between centers or a gear to be cut.
211

(Un",,~.NS

IN THI5 DIRECTION

WORK
CHUCK

Rotary table parts awaiting the assembly process.
The hallam side ofthis batch ofrotary tables shows
the gear teeth that are driven hy the worm gear to
rotate it.

Clamping the part into position
Standard milling machine setups usually involve
aligning the work with the table and then with the
spindle. This is easily accomplished because the
table can be accurately moved with the hand wheels.
Aligning a part on a rotary table can be very trying
because the work has to be clamped into position.
When you consider the fact that the part turns, a
.001" (.03mm) error in location gives a .002" T.I.R.
(Total Indicated Runout) when checked with a dial
indicator.
Indicating in the center of the rotary table
Many times it is advisable to start by doing the
rotary table work first, which can eliminate precision
ali gning. A quick way to align the milling spindle
with the rotary table is by indicating the hole in the
center of the rotary table. This will locate the spindle
directly above the center of the rotary table if the
headstock is square. Next, prick punch or spot drill
the center on the work you wish to have line up with
the rotary table. Put a pointer in the spindle that runs
true. Set the work under the spindle and lower the
head until it engages with the center mark, then
clamp the part down. You now have the work
reasonably aligned with the rotary table and spindle.
At this time, rotate the table with the spindle
running and the pointer slightly backed off. If the
part is properly aligned, the pointer should always
line up with the center mark, and you should write
down your hand wheel settings. It is also advisable
to write an " R" or "L" after the handwheel setting
to remember which way the millieadscrew backlash
was set.
212

ROTARY TABLE
CHUCK UNSCREWS IN THIS DIRECTION

FIGURE I- CUller and Chuck directions of
rotation.

Mounting a chuck to the table
Included with the Sherline rotary table is an adapter
that allows a Sherline chuck to be screwed directly
to the table. This allows work that is of the correct
size and configuration to be quickly aligned with
the rotary table with reasonable accuracy. Be sure
to consider the fact that a mill cutter could unscrew
a 3- or 4-Jaw chuck held on in this fashion (See
Figure I). Use only very light cuts when this adapter
is used. If you believe this could be a problem with
your setup, add a second clamp to eliminate the
possibility ofthe chuck unscrewing from the adapter.
If you are working with a 3-jaw chuck, the tommy
bar can be used along with a small block clamped
to the mill table to keep the chuck from unscrewing.
Making allowances for cutter diameter
A close look at Figure 2 will start making you aware
of the complexities of working with a rotary table.
Unless you are doing a hole layout, you can very
seldom work with the angles and dimensions on your
drawing because of the cutter diameter.
cum. DIAMmR (C)

I

CUnER ANGLE (0..)

CIICUMFElINC[ (CIL) OF
CIRCl! '" (21 CPR) I 'Tt
1t '" 11416

I.CIL '"

"'.
CIL

CIL AT A. '" CI~A·

'H'-.- CumR PATH RADIUS (CPR)
INSIDE SEGMENT
CUnER AllOWANCE IN
DEGREES fOR EACH SIDE", 0..
0.. C + 2

'" FCii.

TOTAl. MOVEMENT '" A· - 20.·

FIGURE 2-A demonstration ofCPR or Cutter Path
Radius. This is a reasonably accurate method
without using trig. tahles.

co

Figures 3 and 4 show the relation of cutter and part.
Start considering what I refer to as CPR, which is
where the center of the cutter is from the center of
the rotary table.

CI = cuml RADIUS
CPR = (UTTER PATH RADIUS

'"
::::>.

(UTI"' PI.. RADIUS (CPR)

SIN.

=....f!..
CPR

CENTER OF ROTARY TABLE

,

(

(uml DIAMUfI = .2SO

CPR =T+T

CR

= CUTTER DIAMETER + 2 =.m

SIN A =
'
PART DIAMETII (A)

(PI = 1.375

C~II

=

'1~;5

= .0909

FIOM TRIG. TABLE: A = 5 13' = 5.13/60· = 5.2 16'
·
0

FIGURE 3- CUlter machining outside ofparI.

FROM CAlCULATOR: A = 5.215'
·
CUTTER AU.OWANC£ DEGREES = 5.215"

CUTTER PATH RADIUS (CPI)

/

,ABU

,

FIGURE 5- This example show how easy it is to
aI/ow for the culler diameter using trigonometry.

(

(PI =T-T

'AR'

you can take a lot of the guesswork out of exact
locations and angles.
The next problem you must be aware of is why the
rotary table must be offset to cut segments. Study
Figure 6 and it becomes obvious that allowing for
the cutter diameter at one end of the segment will
not make any correction at the other.

CUTIlI
cuml DIAMml (C)

D1AMEUII (A)

FIGURE 4- Cutter machining inside ofpart.
Sherline offers adjustable "zero" hand wheels for the
lathe and mill. This makes calculation of the feed
much easier as the handwheels can be reset to "zero"
eac h time. If yo u do not ha ve the resettab le
handwheeis, the job simply requires a bit of notetaking. If you get into the habit of writing your
handwheel setting down and calculating movements,
it's really not bad. A piece of tape stuck along the
edge ofthe mill table and mill base with a mark that
shows starting and finishing points can be of
considerable help. Of course, you will sti ll have to
use your handwheel numbers, but the marks will
make you aware they are coming up. Counting the
turns of a handwheel on long movements can have
disastrous results if you're distracted and turn one
too many. One of our customers attached scales
(rulers) to our mill on both the "X" and "Y" axis,
which I always thought was a good idea. Deluxe
mi ll s are engraved with scales, but it still can be
confusing because you can't usually start at zero. If
you have trig tables or a calculator with trig functions

WITHOUT OFFSET
CENTII Of IOTARYTABLE
AND CENTtI OF SPINDLE

U"

ERROl

' "'1 _ _
_

-- -y~

1

WITH OFFSET
CENTEI Of IOTARYTABlEi

CINTER Of SPINDLE

omn

THE Cuml EDGE MUST LINE
UP WITH THE CENTEIUNE OF
THEIOTARYTABLE

' "I
-

S

• - ..............
I!

fr
1-

THIS EDGE MUST BE

.... '~ ~~11~J~~~T ON
~ THf OPPOSITf SIDE
/~
Of THE IOTARY
~
TABLECfNTUUNE.

/
- - +- -- - YAXIS

r

FIGURE 6- 0ffi'e tting the rotary table to cut
segments.

213

Exampl.: Cuning a wheel with spokes
When one of our customers purchases their first
metal cutting tool, it is usually a lathe and
somewhere in that customer's mind is a brass cannon
he now has an opportunity to build. When a customer
buys his first rotary table, chances are they either
want to drill hole patterns which shouldn't require
any instructions or make some kind of wheel with
spokes in it. Therefore, I will describe how to
"accurately" cut a wheel with spokes. I realize that
in most cases it is not necessary to work to this

degree of accuracy to do ajob of this nature, but to
accurately make a precision part of this type is what

a rotary table is all about. In most cases, I will leave
you to your own common sense as to the depth of
cuts and how much to leave from roughing and
finish cuts. Remember, I have never seen a part
scrapped from taking too light of a cut.
Make an accurate drawing at the start showing
offsets and cutter paths similar to Figure 7 below.
The offsets can be calculated as shown in the sample
which follows.

The versatile rotary table can also be used to
machine a radius. A part held on a faceplate -is spun
on the mill, which is in the horizontal position. A
long toolpostfrom the riser block kit holds a cutting
/001 which pivots as the rotary table is cranked. The
dished face was cut in the same manner.

,,

., .,

3~ 01 .... ~+---t-j...j_

YOFFSET
2,S" 01..-

REMEMBER ... the rotary table center must be
precisely located below the spindle when you start.
Only one half of the segment may be cut from the
calculated point, which is why only one half of the
spoke width is considered. Look at the drawing again
and be sure you truly understand why you can only
cut one half of the segment before proceeding, or
your chances for success will be dismal.

/

/ - HAlF WAY (45°)
THIS SIOf WOUlD Bf
CUT WITH THf YAXIS
OffSn ON THE OTHER

SIOf OF (ENUl
!XAXIS

r-:tYOffSU

(ENTER Of ROTARY TABLE

"10'

Now we have the offsets calculated and the rotary
table "indicated in" in relation to the spindle. We
move the X-axis the amount of the offset, moving
the table to the left. Be sure to consider the backlash,
and it may also be prudent to allow for roughing
and finish cuts. Now move the Y-axis and the Y
offset in (towards the column). This will allow the
first half of the segment to be cut so that it looks
like the diagram. Assuming the part is properly
clamped to the rotary table and held in such a way
that you can't inadvertently cut into the table, it ' s
time to start. The example has four equal segments,
which means a spoke will be cut every 90°; therefore,
a lot of confusion can be eliminated if you start with
your table at 0° (see Figure 8). The center of the
spokes will now layout at 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°,
and the halfway point will be at 45°, 135° etc.

t+t

xOFFm :: .Jt;;(P"";-_-;;~;;;O"ff""nrn,

CUT OUTSIDE
GIVEN: S (SPOKE WIDTH) = .5
CPR (CUTIn P,uH RADIUS) ::: 1.250 -.125 ::: 1.125
«(CUrrER DIA.) = 0.25
:tYOFfSET =

t +f = t+ .2~ :::

XOFfSET = j CPR' - (Y OffSET)'

.375

.,;r.I."12oc .,oc"C", = J1.266 _ .1406 ::: 1.061
"C"_""'

CUT INSIDE
OPR _ .750 (HUB RADIUS + .125 (cunn RADIUSn - .175

XOfFSU :: jePR' - YOFfSET' ::: /.175' - .375' ::: .791
OISTAN(f BUWlEN INSIOE ANO OUTSIDE OffSETS ::: 1.061 -.791 ::: .270

FIGURE 7- Cutter path drawing and calculations.
214

VO"'" 1 0' I
,

fIRST HAlf

/

-

f----- f"+ - --t

1101'1
'

/7
.

(:~--\

;

'- ......

from end mills and rotary tables. The rotary part of
the segment only needs to be moved slightly past
the halfway point for the remainder of the segment
wi ll be cut with the Y-axis offset moved out from
the column and the table rotated in a clockwise
direction.

0'

-''-+--.

It is quicker to cut the first half of all 4 segments,
then move the "Y" offset and complete the segments.
If you're going to try something like this for a first
project, check your entire plan out with .001" cuts
and be positive you're correct before making cuts
that could scrap your part (see Figure 8).

l xAXIS
CUT FIRST HAlF OF
All 4 SEGMENTS

270·
((NUl OF IOTAlYTABLE
YOfFSU

•

COMPUTE SEGMENTS
WITH OPPOSITt
YOfFSEl

C)
T

(J (J

INDUlMl

MDVE YOFFSET

INDEXING H£AD

.-.
VAXlS

1

XAXlS

TAiISTO<K

FIGURE 8- Completing the spokes 0/a wheel.
Allowance for the cutter was taken care of when the
offsets were calculated. It is not necessary to
calculate the value of angle "A" or other angles
because you are only cutting one-half the segment
at a time.
A good rule now is to take a very light cut (.00 1It)
and convince yourself everything is correct. The real
trick of machining is to do something you have never
done before the "first time", and you can't be too
careful. A one-minute check versus three hours or
mote to start over makes this a good investment in
time. The cut along the spoke is accomplished by
moving the X-axis only back and forth using the
calculated points until you get through the part, and
again I remind you it may be wise to take a roughing
cut. Sometimes an undersize (resharpened) end mill
is a good way to rough cut. Then change end mills
for finish passes. This allows the same hand wheel
number to be used for roughing and finishing.
The rotary cuts are made with the X-axis in its proper
position, and the table rotated counterclockwise. One
of the really neat things in machining happens when
using a rotary table to feed work into an end mill,
and I believe it comes about because of the slow
and precise feed that can be obtained. Ifa hole you're
cutting requires a bottom, great finishes can be had

SPINDLflO<K
UCKGW

THE INDEXING ATIACHMENT
Using an indexing attachment or dividing head
This indexing attachment has been designed to give
the average hobbyist an all -purpose method of
dividing circles into an equal number of segments
to aid in cutting gears or any other repetitive,
circular machining operation. It is of a price and
size which makes it ideal for use with miniature
machines. Sometimes called a "dividing head", the
indexing attachment can be used in both horizontal
and vertical modes. A rotary table is moved with a
handwheel which controls the rotational movement.
The indexing attachment utilizes a different method
of movement and was designed to cut clock gears
referred to by clock makers as "wheels".
I actually designed this attachment before the
rotary table. A group of local clock makers wanted
a low cost device to cut gears with and this was my
solution. At that time I didn't believe I could sell a
$500 attachment for a $400 mill, so I didn't have
215

the luxury of designing it with expensive index
plates. I.wanted to have a design that could divide a
circle into any number of parts, and I accomplished
th is by using a rack gear.
Using a rack gear to turn circular motion
into a linear dimension
When the precision rack gear is engaged with the
index gear, it takes a rotary motion and turns it in to
a linear motion that can be measured. This linear
motion cou ld be divided into any number of equal
parts with the aid of a inexpensive calculator. I would
have used a different method if calculators had not
been available. The indexing head accessory costs
less than half the price of a rotary table setup. I' ve
heard clockmakers complain that it is too slow, but
I never looked at it as production equipment. It was
designed to accurate ly get a job done at the
minimum cost. If a gear or simi lar machining job
had to be produced in any quantity, an index plate
could be built using this attachment. This should be
considered the major difference between plate type
indexing and the Sherli ne indexing attachment.

INDEXED METHOD, Drilling a precise hole
pattern.
gears. Since very few gears will work out in even
multiples of 5°, a second method of dividing called
the "calculated method" can be used. It is described
below.

I think the method I used to lock the indexing spi ndle
was fairly clever. I didn ' t want to lock it with any
type of set screw because set screws have a tendency
to rotate the spind le as the screw is turned. I used
the same method with which the headstock is held
to the bed. A cone pointed screw pushes the clamp,
which has an angle corresponding to the cone
pointed screw, against the index gear and pinches
it. This doesn' t move the spindle yet still makes a
positive lock. Although it has been designed to be
used with the Sherline vertical mill , it can be adapted
for use with other types of equipment or used for
different purposes.

It is important to remember to lock the spind le
before attempting any machining. The indexing
lever is NOT a lock and is not intended for any use
other than to locate the index.
2. CALCULATED METHOD. This method will
yield an infinite number of divisions but takes
considerably more time. To set up the head in this
mode, the indexing lever must be raised to its
uppennost position. The rack gear is then inserted
from either side with the teeth towards the spindle
under the lever. It is important that the spindle lock
is loose so the spindle is free to move as the rack is
inserted. The theory behind the calculated method
should be apparent now. As the spindle is rotated,
the rack moves in a linear motion which can be
easily measured. If the total movement of the rack
for one revolution is known, any number of
divisions can be made by dividing this dimension
by the number of divisions required.

Before attempting any machining operation, be sure
your setups use good machining principles and
practices. Work in a careful, professional ,
craftsmanlike manner, and always wear safety
glasses.
Two methods of dividing
I . INDEXE D METHOD . This method is quite
simple and uses the indexing lever and the graduated
scale on the spindle. Internally the indexing lever
engages with a 72-tooth gear, and each tooth equals
5° of rotation. Obviously this method will allow
indexing of only simple hole patterns, since you can
only work in multiples of 5°; however, this is usually
sufficient for most jobs, with the exception ofculting

The calculated linear dimension for one complete
revolution is 4.712 inches (I 19.685mm), but this
dimension may vary slightly from one indexing
attachment to the next. For utmost precision, it is
suggested that you accurately measure your
216

An example of cutting an 83-tooth gear using the
indexing attachment is included in the following
chapter. An example of cutting a 29-tooth gear using
the rotary table is also included so that you can
compare the methods used to see which method will
work best for you. The rotary table is a more versatile
accessory, but the indexing attachment has some
advantages too, including a lower price.

Five basic rules to remember
I. Work ACCURATELY.

2. Detennine the best possible way of holding the
part to be machined. This type of machining requires
a very secure setup.
3. Carefully align the attachment with the mill table.

CALCULATED METHOD- Using the depth rod oj
a dial caliper to measure the position of the rack
gear.
particular indexing head and note the dimension for
future usc. Use a precise Vernier or dial caliper of
at least 5 inches in length (6 inches is preferabl e)
eq uipped with a depth rod.

4. Take cuts that the setup you are using can easily
withstand.
5. Don't try to rush the job! Successive machining
operations make some people careless; therefore, it
is wise to consider the amount of time and effort
you will lose if you destroy your part rather than
how much is left to do.

To determine this dimension for your particular
indexing head, drill a small hole with a center drill
on the very top edge of the faceplate with the
indexing head mounted on its bed. Before drilling
be sure the rack is pos itioned in such a way that one
complete revolution can be turned and still have the
rack properly engaged. Make sure to lock the spindle
and accurately measure from the end of the rack to
the indexing head. After drilling, unlock the spindle
and rotate it one revolution using the hole and
center drill to index the spindle. Measure the rack
again and subtract the smaller number from the
larger. The difference should come out quite close
to 4.712" or I 19.685mm. Since the accuracy of all
your machining is dependent on the precision of this
measurement, it is suggested that you DOUBLE
CHECK your work!
Once you have this dimension, dividing a part into
any number of divisions is easy. Just divide 4.712"
(or the dimension for your attachment if different)
by the number of divisions you wish to make. This
will give you the distance the rack must move for
each division. The math is simple, but a small pocket
calculator saves a lot of time.

An indeXing plate drilled with circular patterns of
holes is a traditional method of dividing a circle
into segments. A pin detents in the holes 10 index
the spindle. Your choice of numbers of divisions is
limited by the hole patterns provided. This miniature
model of a dividing headfor a Hardinge lathe was
buill by Wilhelm Huxhold of On/aria, Canada.

217

•

., •

•

•,

.......

..

•

.. •

I

A custom made double rotary table setup by Bob Beslauer ofFt. Lauderdale, Florida allows for some very
sophisticated rotary movements. Bob designed and machined the plate which mounts on one rotary table
and then holds another rotary table. He used this setup in the mill to machine spiral spoke patterns on
miniature custom automotive wheels.
218

SECTION 3- Vertical Milling Machine Operatians

(hapter 5- Gears and geartrains
Prospecting for surplus treasure
I've always loved gears. They mesh in such perfect
harmony and transmit power with so little loss; that
is, if they have been properly designed. Did you
know that the first computers were gear driven
devices that solved problems mechanically? That's
how I first got interested in them. I've always
enjoyed shopping in industrial surplus shops. I call
it " modern day prospecting". It always amazed me
what large companies and the government would
scrap out. In the late Sixties, many mechanical
computers were coming to the end of their road in
these fine establishments. Every type of gear train
you could ever imagine was available in miniature,
and the gears were perfect. I still have bits and pieces
around my shop. Some came from World War Two
aircraft gunsights which were a perfect example of
mechanical computers. I can't say I ended up using
many of these gears because I could never find the
right combination to use on my particular project,
but I just don' t have the heart to get rid of them.

It had a "planetary" design and the gears were very

smal l. This was in 1968 and the gears for two
prototypes sti ll cost us a thousand dollars. When
we put it together, it really ran roughly. I can ' t
remember whether it was Carl's idea or mine to add
some fine lapping compound to try "lapping them
in". We ruined the entire gear train in less than two
minutes. That was one time I couldn't come up with
a clever excuse. We decided to bui ld the servo with
a conventional gear train and mold it out of plastic.
We still ended up developing the smallest servo that
was avai lable anywhere in the world at that time. so
we were eventually able to tum our initial failure
into a success.
Sorry, there are no shortcuts
when making your own gears
If you are going to make a complex gear train and
you don' t have a lot of money, you are going to
have to make the gears yourself. This can be a very
enjoyable task if you approach the job as a n
individual chall enge. There is no "quick and dirty"
way to produce good gears on a milling machine,
and there also isn ' t any way I could begin to give
the amount of detailed infonnation you need to cut
perfect gears. Most of the infonnation that has been
written on the subject relates to producing gears
commercially. I'm going to try to get you interested
in producing your own gears and give you enough
infonnation to cut gears with a Sherline mill and a
rotary table or ind ex attachment. Later in this
chapter there is an example of each.
There are two basic types of gears---clock gears and
power transmitting gears.

Differential gears salvaged from the scrap yard.
Beautifully made parts are relatively easy to find,
but finding ones that will work in your particular
application is much more difficult.

Another expensive lesson
The next two things I found out about gears is that
you can't usually purchase the sizes you need off
the shelf, and having them custom made can be very
expensive. Years ago while working for Micro
Avionics, my partner and I tried to design the world's
smallest radio control servo to sell commercially.
We had a local gear maker cut the gears for us.
2 19

CLOCK "WHEEl.............."

Clock gears... Lantems and Wheels
Clock gears are used more as indexing devices
because it takes so littl e power to drive the
mechanism. They must last for years and have little
power loss because they are driven by so little
energy. In clockmaker's parlance, the gears are

called "wheels". There are also solid pinion gears
and pinions called "lanterns". The tenn "lantern"
came about because these pinions are made up of a
series of small rods mounted between two discs that
are supported by a shaft. The entire assembly looks
li ke a small la ntern. The advantage of this
arrangement is that the pins that drive the gears are
a very simple shape. They are round. The gear only
requires a slot for the round pin to enter and one
cutter co uld be used to produce many different size
gears. All you have to do is vary the depth and the
cutter will form the proper shape at the top of the
tooth . The lantern gears also produce beautiful gear
trains that are too pretty to hide. Take a closer look
the next time you see a clock on a fireplace mantel
with the gear train exposed. The wheels are called
"Epicycloid" when the gears are on the outside of a
circle and "Hypocycloid" when the gears are fonned
on the inner side of a circle.
Bill Smith: Agreat source of information for anyone
wanting to learn more about clockmaking
One of the nicest men I have met through my
business is William Smith, who has been a clock
maker for over fifty years. He has designed many

beautiful clocks that can be built by an amateur
machinist. Hi s name and accomplishments can be
found on our web site, and he has written a number
of books on building clocks and cutting gears. He
also has several instructional videos available. If you
are interested in the hobby of repairing or making
clocks, Bill Smith is one name you should get to
know.

These gears are designed to transmit power. The
transmission isfrom a Formula Ford race car and
is designed to make il easy 10 change gears to selecl
different ratios depending on track configuration.

Power transmiHing gears
For transmitting power we use a system developed
by the British using the inch system . I believe it is
far superior to the metric system in this case. In fact,
many metric gears are actually the same size as inch
gears except that their size has been converted to a
metric dimension. These are called the "English
module" gears to avoid confusion with the "metric
module". The differences are fully described in
Machinery's Handbook. Gears are governed by their
s ize , and the basis of th e size is called th e
"diametral pitch". Just like a thread, the pitch is
measured from a point on one gear tooth to the same
point on the next tooth. The difference between a
thread and a gear is that a gear has a circular shape.
The tenn "pitch", therefore, is called the "diametral
pitch" because the pitch is measured on a circular
line. The term " pitch" still is very often used to
describe eitherdiametral pitch or circular pitch. The
problem with using this term loosely when speaking
of threads and gears is that it can lead to some serious
confusion.

C.D. Hickman of Virginia devised this setup to cut
several large brass gears on his mill. Behind the
brass disk is a custom drilled indexing wheel.
220

Measuring diametral pitch
The diametral pitch can't be measured from just any
random point on a tooth. It has to be measured at a
place that is called the "pitch diameter". This is not
the outside diameter of the gear, but rather the point
whe re the two gears will come in contact. The
British did something quite clever to simplify this.
They decided that they would start with a one-inch
diameter which has a circumference of 3. 1416".
which equals 11 (the fixed relationship of a circle's
diameter to its circumference symboli zed by the
Greek letter "pi"). The number of teeth that could
be equally divided into this number would be the
"pitch". This really simplifies things. 11 (3.1416) is
a constant on both sides of the equation to figure
blank diameters so it cancels itself out. The D.D. of
the gear blank is larger than the pitch diameter, and
it just so happens that if you add 2 to the number of
teeth on the gear you can come up with the D.D.
The reason the number 2 is added is that gears
contact one another at exactly one half the distance
from the top of the gear tooth to the bottom. Of
course, there is clearance at the bottom ofthe tooth,
but the clearance isn't considered for these simple
calculations.

A typical involllte gear (.·llller

shapes available for each diametral pitch, and a
complete set for one diametral pitch wou ld be rather
expensive. They are available with 14.5 0 and 200
pressure angles . r would recommend using the 20°
pressure angle because of the better tooth form (less
undercutting) when pinion gears are cut. (See next
page for more on pressure angles.) It wou ld be
prudent to decide on the best gear tooth form for
your particular use and to stick with it because of
the hi gh cutter cost.
When purchasing cutters, a part number will be
derived from a list like the following depending on
how many teeth you wish to cut and the diamctral
pitch. (See also chart on next page.)

Chart I-RANGE OF CUTTERS
CUTTER NO.
I
2
3
4
5
6
7
B

For example:
You have to make a gear that has a pitch of24 with
40 teeth. You can come up with a blank size for the
gear you wish to produce without using any
comp licated tables by dividing the pitch into the
number of teeth plus 2:
4024 2 - OD - I 75" ... Wh atcou Id b eSlmper.
+ _
- .
. I?
To detennine the total depth the cutter must cut
including clearance, you divide the constant 2.157
by the pitch. Say, for example, you want to know
how deep a gear cutter must cut to produce a
properly shaped tooth for the above gear:
2.157

~ ~

whole tooth depth ~ .08987"

Choosing the proper gear (utter
With the proper cutter yo u now have enough
infonnation to cut a gear. Notice r said "proper"
cutter. There is a series of cutters called "involute
gear cutters" which are used to produce gear teeth
one at a time on a milling machine with an indexing
device. The cutting shape is determined by the
number of teeth you plan to cut. There are eight

CUTS GEARS fROM

1351eeth to rock
55 to 134
35 to 54
261034
21 to 25
17 to 20
14 to 16
121013

These cutters will produce a fairly good tooth form,
but they are expensive and have a very limited range.
With a little practice and time you may be able to
grind a single-tooth cutter that works like a flycutter.
Use Sherline's PIN 32 17 gear tooth cutter for this.
A 114" lathe tool blank is provided which fits this
holder. You will need a gear similar in shape to the
one you are making to use as a shape gage to grind
the tip of the cutter. If you are replacing a damaged
gear, it may be used for a gage to shape the cutter as
long as the tooth form is correct, not worn out. The
comers on a bench grinder wheel are used to generate
the shape on the tool blank. At first it may seem
almost impossible to do this, but it is not as difficult
as it sounds. Just keep check ing the tool against the
gear being used for a gage by holding the two up to
a light source. You ' ll find that the final grinding is
done by "feel " . Lathe tool bits are cheap and
available, so it is a process worth learning.
22 1

(hurt 2-INVOLUTE GEAR (UTTERS
DIAMETRAL
PITCH

HOLE
SIZE

CUTTER
DIA.

14
16
18
20
24
26
28
30
32
36
40
48

I
I
I
I
1/8
1/8
1/8
1/8
1/8
liS
liS
7JS
liS

2-1/2
2-3/8
2-3/8
2-3/8
2
1-3/4
1-3/4
1-/3/4
1-3/4

14
16
18
20
24
32
40
48

I
I
1
1
1
7JS
liS
liS

2-1/2
2-1/2
2-3/8
2-3/8
2-1/4
1-3/4
1-3/4
1-3/4

22

1·3/4

1-3/4
1-3/4
1-3/4

When the tool is mounted in the holder, don ' t allow

have been working with , you would find that the
teeth on the rack would have sides that are straight
but tilted at an angle . This angle is call ed the
" pressure angle". 14.5° and 20° are the mo st
common. The higher the pressure angle, the greater
the force generated to separate the gear centers. The
lower the pressure angle, the more a gear tooth will
be "undercut" when pinion gears with less than 20
teeth are cut. Undercutti ng occurs when the tooth
fonn of the pinion must allow for its mating gear
tooth fonn.

A gear tooth has the shape of an involute curve. This
is a generated shape. Suppose that a rack gear had a
pressure angle of 20° and we meshed a 200-tooth
gear to it. The gear tooth would be shaped almost
"the same as the tooth on the rack, because the gear
tooth is curving away from the rack very slowly.
With pinion gears, one tooth is in contact with an
individual tooth on the rack for more time as it
revo lves. The tip of the tooth on the rack needs
clearance to keep from binding, and this clearance
has to be shaped into the pinion gear. The only way
for these gears to mesh is to have "undercut". The
problem is you can't cut a pinion with undercut one
tooth at a time. They are generated shapes produced
with special machines. They can also be useless
because of this design flaw called undercutting.

it to stick out any more than necessary. The drawing
on page 228 shows a typical gearcutting setup.
Remember, this tool would be considered a single
lip cutter and the feed rate must correspond. For

example, a 1001 like this should cui _0005" (.01 mm)
per revolution. If the spindle speed were 1000 rpm,

the feed rate should be .5" (12mm) a minute. A
tailstock isn' t always necessary; however, I believe

the best setups wi ll use the tailstock. Remember,
the gear blank must run true before cutting the teeth.
If the teeth have been cut in such a way that they

don't run true with their shaft, a gear train may run
fine until all the "high points" come together at the
same time. Depending on the gear train's ratio, this
binding may only occur every now and then.

Pressure angle considerations and undercuHing
A few other things must be considered before going
on. A gear doesn't rub on its mating gear, it rolls. If
gears rubbed against one another they would
generate so much heat the gears would melt in a
short time. Gears have another component called a
"pressure angle" and it is expressed in degrees. If

Don Martin of Sacramento, Californ ia built ·this
beautiful supercharged V-8 drag boat engine.
Notice the highly polished aluminum surfaces which
show a lot of care went into this working model.

you had a rack gear thai meshed with the gear you
222

by adding the total number of teeth used in the
mating pair and dividing this by twice the diametral
pitch.

For example:
You want to find the distance between centers for
two gears that have a diametra l pitch of 24. One
gear will have 30 teeth and the other wi ll have 20
teeth.
Therefore:
30 + 20 ~ 50 ~ 1.0417"
2x 24
48
It is important to notice that distance between
centers is detennined by the total amount of teeth
used in the mating pair of gears; therefore, a
combination of24T and 26T would also work with
these centers. Transmissions that have a fixed
distance between shafts, such as those used in a race
car, may get finer adjustments between ratios by
using a non-standard diametral pitch gear to come
up with a pair of gears that also uses the same
distance between shaft centers. They can arrive at
the diametral pitch by working the basic equation
backwards.
Examp le: You want to produce a pair of gears with
less of a ratio change than can be had with our
previous example. The 20T and 30T gears have a
ratio of .666667. This means that one revolution of
the 20T gear would tum the driven 30T gear .666667
of a complete revolution. The next ratio higher you
could come up with without changing the diamctral
pitch would be 21 T and 29T which also totals 50.
This would give you a ratio 01'21129 = .724, which
is a considerable change. If we used a 2 1T and a
30T the ratio may come closer to what we wanted.
21 . ;. 30 = .7 ratio. These fine adjustments may solve
a prob lem for a d river who wants maximum
horsepower on a particu lar part of a race track, but
they can create lots of work for the gear cutter who
has to have spec ial cutters made to produce these
"off size" gears.

Greg Conrad of Wisconsin made this extremely
detailed railroad crane car whichjinishedjirst place
in a model show. Notice the detailed geartrain.
Beating the problem of undercutting
Two methods have been used to ove rcome the
problem of undercutting. The standard way is to
increase the pressure angle on mating gears that
utilize a small pinion. These pinions are found at
the first stage of a gear train where the ve locit ies
are high but the loads are low. The pinion gear on a
high speed motor would be a good examp le.
Therefore, don ' t be surprised to find more than one
pressure angle in a si ngle gear train. A quick check
would be to try to mesh the output gears with the
pinion and examine the fit under magnification. The
second method involves enlarging the pitch
diameter on the pinion gear so that the tooth form
has less undercut. Agai n, Machinery's Handbook
is the best source of information on this method.
Calculating distance between gear centers
If the gears have been cut perfectly, the distance
between the centers of these gears can be calcu lated

We can figure the new diametral pitch. The 20T and
30T would give us a distance between centers of
2.5" if the gears had a diametral pitch of 10. We can
then so lve this simple equation by having the
distance between centers remain fixed and modify
the diametral pitch :

21 + 30 ~ 2.5"
2 x DP
223

Solving for OJ> wc gct:
21 +30 = 102

2 x 2.5

.

The ncw diamctral pitch would be 10.2.
One ofthc main rcasons I wanted you to understand
this is to convince you that not all gears have a
standard diametral pitch. They make gages to check
involute gears, but a small difference may be hard
to sce. Don '{ forget, if you know the number of teeth
and the distance betwecn centers you can always
calcu late the diametra l pitch. Gears are too hard to
make to have an error take place before the first cut
has even been made.

Finding the distance between centers of existing gears
Perfect gears are ve ry difficult to produce one tooth
at a time, and this is the best way r have come up
with to find gear centers for a pair of gears that may
not be as accurate as we planned. Mount one gear
to a plate in such a way that it spins freely without

wobbling. Locate the mill spindle directly over this
center and zero or record the handwheel settings.
Be sure to include the backlash direction with an
"L" or "R" . Now mount the second gear on the
spindle where it can also spin freely. The two gears
can be brought together until they start to bind and
then "backed off' until they spin freely again. Don',
forget to use the same backlash direction, and the
handwheel graduations will indicate what the perfect
distance between these two gears should be.

(uHing gears with iust a mill and a vise
The simplest way to produce a gear without any
fancy tooling is to have a gear with the same
number of teeth (or a multiple) on hand. This can
be the worn gear that is being replaced. It is only
being used as an index device, so the tooth fonn
doesn't affect the final product. Mount this gear on
the same shaft that the gear blank is mounted on.
The shaft should be long enough to extend beyond
both sides of your vise. With the index gear on one

711e ~ear on lop is Ihe "before ". A similar gear in the lathe is gripped with a 4-jaw chuck. II is being bored
0111 so Ihal il can be used as a sixth gear in a 5-speed Volkswagen transmission. The gear is now installed
in the car and worksftne. You really have 10 know your way around a transmission to try a project like this,
hilI {l1he size is righl. lab/etop lools can handle even a job like this.
,..-'<TO......""'m:..,..
224

side of your vise and the gear blank o n the other all
you need is an index "fin ger" mating with the index
gear to cut gear teeth. The shaft " locks" between
the vise jaws and the old gear is used as an index
dev ice. By the way. th is ind ex fin ge r mu st fit
without any slop. If you ground your ow n cutter as
I previously descri bed, you have beaten the system.
beca use you didn ' t buy so me very ex pe nsive
accessories to get the job done.

Bevel, helical, worm and other types of gears
The spur and clock gears we have considered can
be mac hined with a standard milling machine. but
there are many other types of gears. Bevel. spiral
bevel. helical, internal. herringbone. and worm gears
all have shapes that are very difficult to produce on
a standard mill . Remember th at gear teeth are a
generated shape and are produced by hav ing the
cutter make multiple cuts o n the tooth as the bl ank
roll s through the cUller. Thi s produces the proper
shape by fa nning the tooth with many minute cut s.
Gears cut on a mill are fa nned by the shape of the
culler. I consider some special gears like the spiral
bevel, internal, and herringbone gears to be virtually
impossible to cut on a standard milling machine.

Lea m illg to produce the gears/or Slieriille's rotary
table taught me a lot about making worm gears.
a combination wi th a long li fe.) Cutters like this
probably ex ist, but I have never seen one. I learned
quite a bit about worm gears because we cui our
own gears to make the Sherline 4" rotary table. As
you will recall , the diametral pitch is a curved line
while the worm is a straight line. Wonns that mesh
gears have a pitc h eq ua l to the diametra l pitch
di vided into It (3. 14 16). On a manual lathe these
are not standard gear combi natio ns. and you will
have to build up a gea r train th at will turn th e
lea dsc rew at t he ri g ht ra tio. (T he meth od of
determin ing thi s ratio is explai ned in thi s chapter.)
When viewed from the side the teeth look like a
rack gear. When viewed fro m the top the teeth are
angled. This is why the cutter must be on an angle
fo r the gears to mesh when the worm is sq uare to
the wonn gear. These gears can be made with both
le ft - a nd ri g ht -hand lead s. Yo u will be ve ry
disappointed if you don' t take thi s into considerat ion
and end up with a wonn that doesn' t mesh with its
gear. Worm gears are also produced with double
and tripl e leads. Thi s ca n increase the rati o per
revolution of the worm, and . of course, the mating
worm gear would have to have the teeth cut at more
of an angle to accommodate the increased lead.

A rack-gellerating process planes a double-helical
gew; You a lii see why it would be impractical to
11)' to make a gear like this using a home shop setup.

Some worm gear trivia
Fo r what it' s worth. he re ' s a pi ece of
in fo rm at io n on wor m gears yo u mi g ht
someday find useful ; A dia ml! tra l pitch of
6.t wi ll mes h :-. urpri :-. ingly well wilh th e
thread of a standard 1/-l -20 T PI bolt.

(uHing worm gears
A worm gear could be cut one tooth at a time if the
head were tilted at the appropriate angle and a proper
di ameter c ulle r is used . (Th e c utte r di ameter
should be slightly larger than the worm to produce
225

J71is se/,!lp~;;;;;::tf';: C<""I,on,,"/,, j",m
gear fO make a 45 ° helical gear. The inset photo shows the finished part- a
shaft o/a small internal combustion engine.
226

Special projeds using Sherline tools
There is a method explained in Machinery's
Handbook that describes how to mill a bevel gear.
We recently added to Sherline' s accessory line a
"tilting angle table" which can be used in
conjunction with our rotary table to produce a bevel
gear. A photo of a setup to cut a bevel gear is shown
on page 232.

•
•

•

o

•

•
0 ••

A tilting angle
table like this one
used with a rotary
table would give
you the movements
necessary to
produce a bevel
gear.

The previous page shows the setup I used to cut a
helical gear on a Sherline mill by gearing the
indexing attachment to the mill table so the index
attachment would rotate the part at the correct ratio
to the table movement. I used screw-cutting change
gears to get the proper ratio. The gear I cut was a
45 0 helical gear. This meant that the gear would have
to rotate on its pitch diameter exactly the same
amount as the table was moved. Remember, the pitch
diameter of helical gears has to be enlarged to allow
the tooth shape to remain proper and it becomes a
function of the cosine of the angle. This is fully
discussed in Machinery's Handbook. I only had to
cut one special gear to have a gear train accurate
enough to do this. I have found that calculating gear
ratios is easier when writing them as fractions.
Calculating gear ratios by using fradions
Suppose I wanted to make a gear ratio of 1.248 to I.
The I would be the driver and 1.248 would be the
driven gear.
The formula for a gear ratio is:
Drivers
Driven
In this case that would be:
I

1.248
Multiplying top and bottom by 1000 you get:
1000
1248

Dividing top and bottom by 8 gives you:
125
156
Factoring the numbers gives you:
5 x 25

2 x 78
Factoring to add another set of gears to the gear train
would yield:
5 x 25 x 2
2 x 39 x 4
Factor again because 25T and 39T are not standard
gears to get:
5x IOx5x I
2x13x2x6
Take the combinations and try to use existing gears
you may already have.
The combinations used were my third attempt to
use only Sherline screw cutting gears.
This fraction could also be expressed without
changing its value as:
5 x 10 x 5
6 x 13 x 4
Remember you can do any multiplication or
division to a fraction as long as you do it to both the
top and bottom:
5/6 ~ 30/36
10113 ~ 20/26
514 ~ 40/32
Lets check it out:
30 x 20 x 40
36 x 26 x 32
equals I to 1.248 exactly.
These are all gears that are included in a Sherline
screw cutting accessory. They also don't contain any
error. An amazing number of gear combinations can
be achieved from just 10 gears by "playing with
numbers". Machinery's Handbook also includes
instructions on this and other methods to find the
proper combinations of gears.
Cutting gears with a rotary table
I'm going to leave it up to you to determine when
you know enough about gears to try to produce one.
Gears are built to a rigid set of rules, and they are
more complex than you might imagine. I've tried to
227

describe the working of gears in the simplest of
terns. On second thought, it might just be because I
don ' t know many complex terns.

GeNing organized to cui a simple gear
J wi ll on ly try to explain how to cut a simple, low-

tolerance gear. You will also have to detennine the
blank size, depth of cut, spindle RPM and so on
from the infornation I've given you or any other
publication on gears you may have found. If you
successfull y cut a good gear on your first attempt,
be very proud of yourself. It can be frustrating if
you are not organized and thoroughly prepared.
Gears ca n be cut using a rotary table with a
reasonab le amount of prec ision. In many cases,
gears- even inexpensive ones- are very precise.
Gears are usually produced by "hobbing". This
method uses a cutter that is similar to a worn gear.
(See photo on page 233.) The teeth are generated
with both the cutter and the blank turning. In fact,
the cutting process looks just like a worm gear
running. Methods like this produce perfectly shaped
teeth that are perfectly spaced. It may be theoretically
possible to produce a perfect gear one tooth at a time,
but your odds of success are dismal if this is the
type of gear that is required . I suggest you stick with
sim pl e type involute or clock gears for your first
few proj ects.

Why Sherline uses a rotary table and not on index plate
First,let's consider what accuracy is attainable with
a rotary table. The rotary table has a hobbed gear
that is part of the table section. Thi s gear is as
perfect as you can hob a gear, and few shops could
ever find an error in the gear quality. The mating
wonn gear has an adjustment to eliminate most of
the backlash. Each degree has been divided into 10
parts that can be clearly seen. On a four-in ch
diameter, one tenth of a degree only represents a
movement of .003" ; however, this one-tenth of a
degree can be interpolated. If a gear is cut with an
O.D. of2", the accuracy is doubled. This should be
more than enough accuracy needed to produce
usable gears. I have heard that the best way to index
gears is with an index plate. Customers assume that
the holes in index plates are located perfectly; I don 't.
A set of plates may not have the index to cut all the
teeth that may be required . They also cost more than
either ofSherline's methods for cutting gears. The
rotary table and the indexing attachment can also
be used for proj ects other than cutting gears. I have
never designed the Sherline machines to be used
for production. The methods used for building parts
one at a time are simply too slow for production but
will work fine in your home shop.
Calculating your cuts
To figure the amount to move between cuts, an
electronic pocket calculator is very helpful. Simply
divide 3600 by the number of teeth you wish to cut.
This will give you an answer in degrees and tenths
that can be used directly on your rotary table without
conversion to degrees, minutes and seconds. Your
rotary table is calibrated directly in degrees and
decimal divisions of a degree .
Example: cuNing a 29-tooth gear
(Note: I have purposely used a number o/teeth that
does not easily divide into 360 0 as this will often be
the situation in which you will find yourself)

A sample setup for cutting a gear. The small inset
shows the column moved back to the rear hole on
the standard mill to allow clearance for cutting
larger diameters. The deluxe mill has a 2" longer
base which makes this unnecessary in most cases.
228

Here are the calculations and handwheel settings you
would need to cut a 29-tooth gear. Remember that
the table is marked every 50 and one revolution of
the hand wheel is 50 which is divided into 50 parts.
Therefore, each line on the handwheel equals 1110
of a degree. The figures that follow on the next page
show the calculations and how the hand wheel
settings would look for the first 4 cuts on the 29tooth gear.

ROTARYTABLE

HANDWHEEl

SETTING

SETTING

usually so accurate the 29th calcu lation should yield
almost exactly 360°.
I. First calculation: 3~~0

FIRST
CUT

o

~

12.4137931 0 (2nd cut)

o
2. Press " Memory" key (usually IMI or IM+!) to
store this figure

SECOND

o

CUT

3~~0

(Remember that the first calculation is actually for

15

the second cut, because the first cut is made with

~
x I

the handwheels both set at " 0" .)

~ 12.4137931 0

10 0 + 2.4U(

~

3. Press 1+1 key
4. Press IRecali1 key
5. Press

12.413r

7. Press Irecalll key
8. Press

THIRD
15

"calculated method" described on pages 3-4-8 and
3-4-9 of the previous chapter.

360 x 2 ~ 24.82758621 0
29

30 45
1 1& I

key (4th cut), etc.

The indexing attachment can also be used to cut a
gear. Fo llo wing is an example that uses the

0

CUT

I~I

INDEXING ATTACHMENT

30

I ~I [

FOURTH

key (3rd cut)

6. Press 1+1 key

This part can be interpolated

CUT

I~I

EXAMPLE:
Say you want to cut an 83-tooth gear, 56 pitch (The
size of the blank is arrived at by using the formula
at the beginning of this chapter or from Machin ery's
Handbook.) The cutter can be purchased or ground

r''1(;'' 'I'" To'' '1
INDEXING ATTACHMENT

0
360 x 3 ~ 37.2413793 10
29

Degree calculations and handwheel seltings for
making the first four cuts on a 29-tooth gear.
The reason you should divide then multiply each
time is if you "rounded off' on the first division,
your error would build up by the number of teeth
you were cutting. rf your pocket calculator has a
memory function there is an even easier method of

calculating each cut. Simply store the first in
memory and add it to itself each time. Because the
calculator stores the number to even more decimal
places than it displays on the screen, the answer is

FIGURE 4- Typical setup for CUlling gear teeth

229

from a lathe tool. The blank can be mounted on an
arbor and held between centers. The dog is clamped
on the arbor in such a way that it engages with the
faceplate. Care must be taken to eliminate all play
where the dog engages with the faceplate. The shaft
must be rigid enough to withstand the forces of
machining.
See that the cutter is properly held in a holder and
has been located on center using the tailstock center
for a reference point. The indexing attachment
should be properly clamped to the machine table,
aligned with an indicator and the rack gear located
in such a way that a complete revolution can be
turned. You are ready to begin.

Making the first cut
Before you begin "making chips", look again at your
setup; is it really SAFE? Also make sure you're
wearing safety glasses. Remember, that cuts of this
type require very rigid setups because of the
intermittent cutting action. If the gear blank is thin,
it may require additional support by sandwiching
the gear blank between support pieces shaped like
large washers and of a material which is easily
machined.

referred to as "A"). From instructions in the
previous chapter, you have already figured the total
throw of your indexing head- say it is4.712" . You
now divide this number by the number of divisions.
in this case 83, to get: 4.712 x 1/83 ~ .056771", or
rounding off, .057". This is now added to or
subtracted from dimension "A". At first glance it
would appear that all you need to do is add .057"
for each cut because an error of only .000229" is so
small it can be discounted. But if you multiply this
error by the total number of teeth (in this case 83)
you would end up with an error of .019" which
would make the last tooth you cut a very
"interesting" shape. This is what is known as
"tolerance buildup" and is the reason you must use
your basic formula at each step to calculate the next
dimension rather than simply adding rounded off
dimensions. The second cut and each succeeding
cut are calculated as follows: 4.712 x 2183 ~ .113542
or .114". Add this to or subtract from dimension
"A", index and cut.

Acalculator with a "memory" function
makes the math easy
As mentioned previously, even inexpensive modem
electronic calculators usually have a "memory"
function which can make your job easier. Although
the calculator may only read out 6 to 8 decimal
places, the figure is actually held in the calculator' s
memory to a far greater level of accuracy. To make
these calculations using the calculator' s memory
function you would proceed as follows:

Turn on the machine spindle and move the Y-axis
toward the cutter while moving the X-axis back and
forth until the cutter just starts to touch the blank.
Write down the dial setting and calculate the total
depth of the cut. (The information to calculate this
can be found also in Machinery's Handbook.) The
first cut should be less than .010" (.20mm) deep.
Observe the cutting action carefully. Is the cutter
cutting properly? Is there excessive vibration in the
setup? Is the cutting speed proper? There is no book
written that can give you the answer to these
questions. This is where experience and
craftsmanship come into play. The best way to make
good parts is to work VERY CAREFULLY! To cut
an 83-tooth gear means you have to do 83 successive
machining operations correctly to make a good
part ... 82 out of 83 is a waste of time!

1. Measure the distance from the end of the rack
gear to the body of the indexing head (dimension
"A") at the first cut.
2. The first calculation (2nd cut) is 4.712 x 1/83 ~
.056771" Hit the memory key to store this number
(usually [M+[ or [M[ on most calculators). Add the
rack length (dimension "A") to this number and
write it down rounded off to 3 decimal places. This
is the length of the rack for the. 2nd cut.

Index for the next cut
Once your cutting speed and feed are to a point
you're sure you can repeat the same operation over
and over again with excellent results, finish out your
first cut to its final depth. Now it is time to index for
the next cut. Measure the distance from the end of
the rack to the index head carefully before unlocking
the spindle. Write down this dimension (it will be
230

3. To figure the setting for the 3rd cut you will add
the total on the calculator from step 2 to the number
in memory as follows:
A. Hit the [+[ key

B. Hit the [MR) or [MRC[ key (Memory
Recall)
C. Hit the [~) key and write down the total
rounded off to 3 places

Here is a photo ofa setup similar to the one shown in the drawing 011 page 228 except an indexing attachment
and 3-jaw chuck are used to hold the shaft which supports the gear that is being cut.
231

CUlling a bevel gear on Sherline tools shows how a number ofaccessories can work IOgether 10 accomplish
a complicated setup. The Model 5400 deluxe mill is set up in the horizontal configuration using the horizontal
milling conversion (PIN 6100). A ~pecial cutter is held in a long gearcutting arbor in the headstock spindle.
The part is held in a 3.1" 3-jaw chuck (PIN 1040) which;s attached to the rotary table (PIN 3700). Two
hold down clamps (PIN 3012) are used to keep the chuckfrom unscrewing during the cut. The rotary table
is mounted 10 a tilting angle table (PIN 3750) which is set to a 30° angle and attached to the mill table. The
inset closeup shows the gear teeth being cut.
232

Other indexing operations use the same methods.
With each cut your understanding of the techniques
involved will increase. By working and thinking in
a careful manner you should be successfu l on the
first attempt. Although the instructions given here
have been related to cutting a gear. the same
approach is used for any type of indexed machining
operation.

Above: The gears that make up Ihe Sherline thread
cutting allachmenl were cut on a gear hobber. Here
the gear hobber can be seen in action cutting a batch
of J5 gears alone lime.

The [M+} and [MRC} keys on a simple electronic
calculator make the mathfor successive operations
easy and accurate 10 many decimal places,
eliminating "Iolerance buildup ". This parlicular
calculalor also makes conversions between the
metric and inch system.

Below: The worm-shaped cutter on a gear hobber
accurately cuts spur or helical gears in a production
shop.

4. To figure the setting for the 4th cut you will add
the total on the calculator from step 3 to the number
in memory using the same sequence: I+IIMRII=I .
S. Continue this sequence until you have written
down the settings for each of the 83 teeth. Using the
memory's ability to store a number to many
decimal places, your 83rd calcu lation should come
so close to dimension "A" plus 4.712 that the error
is in significant. (On my ca lcu lator the 83rd
calculation was off by .000007".)

233

Shown here is a se!f-co1lfained CNC rotary indexer based on Sherline's 4" rotary table. Included is a
programmable input keypad that contains its own microprocessor. A power supply (not shown) plugs into
the lVall and converts 110 VAC currellt to 24 VDC to rim the processor and stepper motor. Watchmakers or
anyone with a need to do gear clltting or other radial machinillg or drilling jobs will find this accessory
takes all the headaches out of repetitive indexing operations. At less than the cost of a complete set of high
quality indexing plates, this accessory represents the future of indexing.
Operation is simple. After emering the number of divisions of a circle from 1 to 999 or degrees (to three
decimal places) all a simple numeric keypad. The table advances quickly and precisely to the next position
at the touch of a single advance key. If all error is made, previous positions can be recalled with the touch
of another button. Backlash error is accommodated electronically to reduce it to zero. Basic resolution is
14,400 steps per revolution or 0.025° per step. This allows the accurate machining of items like gears with
odd numbers of teeth. Computations are made internally by the microprocessor to a high degree ofaccuracy
to avoid cumulative errors.
This stalld-alone unit includes everything needed to make complex indexing jobs easy. In addition, the unit
can be connected to all existing CNC control to function as an indexer in that system. Fixtures are available
to mOIlIlf the table in the vertical position as well.
_ _ lHUI.

Three handsome display pieces. On the left is Qfl
alcohol fired thimble steam engine. 0" the right is
a "huff-n-puff' steam engine. It has a large-mouthed
illfake opening so YOII call blow into it alld watch it
rUIl. In the middle is a pocket watch for size
referellce. These two steam engine projects were
entered in the 1997 Machinist's Challenge contest
by James E. Neal of Elk River, Minnesota.
234

SEGION :>- Vertical Milling Machine Operatians

Chapter 6- Accessories for milling
THE HORIZONTAL MILLING CONVERSION
Two configurations open up many milling possibilities
The horizontal milling conversion is a takeotlofan
idea sent to us by Joseph Kubin, a toolmaker from
Maryland. With this attachment, the mill spindle (in
the hori zontal position) can be aligned with the Xand Y-axes. There are three places the column can
be mounted to the horizontal conversion base. When
the spindle is lined up with the Y-axis, the outennost
position is for drilling and milling (see position A
in photo below).

The c losest po sition is used for milling. The
configuration of the work has a lot to do with the

choice to be made, but remember, when milling, the
closer the end mills are mounted to the sp indle
bearings, the more rigid the setup . The spindle can
also be mounted lined up with the X·axis by
reversing the position of the XY table on the
horizontal base and mounting the co lumn in the
single set of holes.
To configure the machine so the spindle is over the
X·axis, the XY base must be reversed from its

,

The horizontal milling conversion is set up in position "A" to machine large surface areas using the long
X·axis travel. Next to the base at the left is the end of the mill column base which has been shortened to
lower the headstock. The block is replaced to return the machine to conventional heightfor normal milling.
235

Using the alignment bars to save time in future setups
The 1/4" x 112" alignment bars are clamped against
the co lumn base and XY table after the machine is
ali gned so it isn ' t necessary to align it every time
the configuration is changed. How close the machine
has to be aligned is dependent on the work to be
performed. A machinist ' s square from the milling
table to the column bed (dovetai l) will usually be
good enough, but a dial indicator would be helpful
for close tolerance work .
NOTE: It is possible to move the Y-axis saddle to
the point the lead screw disengages from the nut
without the co lumn being in place. Normally, it
would hit the column base before it could disengage.
Modifying the mill column base for use
with the conversion
The advantage of modifying the column for this
attachment is to allow the spindle ccntcr to go
below the top of the tablc. This allows a piece of
material to be clamped directly to the table and the
edge overhanging the table can be machined. We
also modify the column sadd le with another
alignment groove in the horizontal position. All
vertical milling machines manufactured after 1991
will come with the groove cut. The co lumn base is
modified by cutting 2" off the bottom, making it a
spacer block and retapping what's lcft over. This
allows the co lumn to be mounted with or without
the spacer in either the horizontal or vertical
configuration. If you have access to a saw and mill,

The horizontal milling conversion set up in position
"B" to take advantage ofthe long Y-axis travel.
normal position, that is, with the Y-axis handwheel
away from the Sherline label (see Position 8).
The advantage of this setup is you have 9" of throw
from the spindle nose and you could drill and bore a
hole 8" from the edge that is clamped down. If the
mill was in its vertical configuration the same edge
would interfere with the co lumn. A point to
consider is that any axis that moves the work in and
out from the end of the spindle becomes the Z-axis
and the up and down of the column will usually be
called the "Y" axis when the mill is in a horizontal
configuration.

Another view 0/position "A " (left) and position "B" (right). Note that in position "A ", the vertical column
and drive can also be mountedfurther toward the back a/the table should your setup require it.
236

you could make these modifications yourself. The
drawings for these modifications are included with
the conversion. If you do not wish to attempt the
modification yourself, your mill column base can
be returned to the factory for modification.

that actually raises the entire saddle on which the
X- and Y-axes are mounted. With the headstock
mounted on an angle, a standard Sherline mill
couldn't be used to drill a hole unless the spindle
could also be moved on its own axis. Therefore, the
standard Sherline mill can only drill and bore angular
holes by clamping the work on an angle, because,
without a quill to advance the cutting tool, the angle
has to be in relation to the movement of the vertical
column. This can cause a problem because many
large parts are difficult to clamp on an angle. A better
setup would be to have the work clamped directly
to the table and then tilt the column to the appropriate
angle. It would even be easier to use if the angle
could be read directly from calibrated graduations.
This was the goal in the design ofthe rotary column
attachment.

A part held vertically using the right angle plate can
have a 9" x 6" area that can be machined without
moving the work. If you think about it, that's a lot
of movement for a machine of this size. I believe
you will find this a useful accessory. The right angle
plate is also a very useful accessory when used in
conjunction with the horizontal milling conversion.

Clamping instructions
To clamp the column to the horizontal milling
conversion plate, use the two 1" x 1/4-20 socket head
cap screws which are included. Use the 3" x 114-20
socket head cap screws when the spacer block is
used.
To clamp the column to the XY base, use the two
1-3/4" x 114-20 socket head cap screws. Use the
3-3/4" x 114-20 socket head cap screws when the
spacer block is used.

A. Sianciord mill with hHd1fDck tiltH.
The -Z- axil handwheel cannat amMO
tilt drill lilt tIM plOpDr angl •• H_r,
.nglad milling can lID ~1sW

The alignment bars and the XY table are held to the
base with 5/8" x 114-20 socket head cap screws (10
included).

' ..1

/

-~-

.... ,..
..'St .. ...

......

'1

,

B. Standard mlll with col.....
tlltM Itlng 1M rota..,coI....
attachrMnt. Haw tIM 'pind!.
acM_1 0/1 tIM uk at tIM tilt for
drUling whill tIM part k_ntad

,
,
I
,
,
I
,
,
,

"IIDrI ta

tIM table.

ROTARY COLUMN ATTACHMENT
Angle drilling on a standard 3·axis mill
Full size milling machines have the spindle mounted
in a "quill" which advances the cutting tool from
the headstock. This allows a hole to be drilled on an
angle because the quill can be used to move the
spindle in and out to drill a hole while the headstock
is angled to the side. When the quill is moving at an
angle, the Z-axis is not moving. The table can still
be raised and lowered on the Z-axis by a leadscrew

Here is why drilling at an angle doesn't work on a
standard Sherline mill. A) The angled headstock
moves up and down on Z-axis only. The drill tip
cannot be advanced on the spindle axis. B) On the
tilted column, the headstock moves on the axis of
the spindle to allow drilling. Note that the part needs
to be offset from center on the X-axis 10 align with
the new axis of the column.
237

~

~
, ,"""i ...
.. r

,

I

'

...

~,.

f'..yal~
~

... ,.........
/i ~ .

I~~~s;.~l .

MAGNifiED SCRIBE LlNS
AND MOtJNTING BLOCM
"~

/~ .....

'1
I

I
t
I

I

~ I

./

,

I

,

I

I.

I

:

,

'
,

~i;;;;'{j.l~I '
:
:

)

').,;

l....
.......

'-J/

GlADUATID ClAMPING liNG

fiXED PLATE

I
I
I

,

J ..- "
.....

I

I
I
(Mill COLUMN BASE)

An exploded view of the rotary column attachment shows the relationship of the parts.

Installing the rotary column attachment
to open up more machining possibilities

The attachment is easy to instalL It is only about .7"
(17.8mm) thick, so it can be left on the machine as
a pennanent addition. The drawing above shows the
order in which the parts are installed. The scribe
lens block is simply glued to the column base.

With the rotary column attachment angle drilling
becomes possible because the entire column can be
tilted on an angle along the X-axis (milling table).

The calibrated adjustment ring and magnifying
Sight on the "zero " scribe line make setting an angle
easy and quite accurate. Here a 30 0 angle is setJor
drilling into a block mounted square to the table.
Angles up to 90 0 on either side oj vertical can be
set using the calibrations on the adjustment ring.

Tilting the Z-axis column makes drilling an angled
hole easy. The calibrated adjustment ring and
magnifying sight on the "zero " scribe line make

selling an angle easy and quite accurate. The column
can be rotated up to 90° in either direction.
238

Why "pinning" the column is not recommended
I don't recommend "pinning" the column in place
with a dowel pin. This arrangement causes more
problems than it eliminates. When a dowel pin fits
the hole tightly enough to be considered accurate,
Ihe dowel pin is very difficult to remove. Ifit's loose
enough 10 be easily removed, it's nol accurate
enough to do you much good. Most full size
milling machines do not use any pinning methods
to square up their heads because it isjust not accurate
enough. Each time the column is returned to the
vertical position it should be "indicated in" using a
dial indicator 10 make sure it is square with the table.

Other accessories
Use of part holding accessories like the milling vise,
tooling plale, hold-down clamps, tilting angle table
and chucks are covered in chapter I of this section.
The rOlary table and indexing attachment are
covered in chapters 4 and 5. A discussion of milling
cutters like end mills, nycutters and boring tools is
in Section 1,'Chapter 6.2 and 6.4.

Not everythingyou make has to have practical value.
Sometimes it's fun to make something jus/ because
it looks cool. This interesting shape was generated
by Dick Saunders of Manchester, Iowa. Dick also
lIses his tools to make jewelry, among other things.

Master mode/maker Phil Mattson (above) uses a miniature mill
and lathe to make gears, pulleys, deck guns, winches, port lights.
alltennas, hinges and other ship deck details.
The quality of the Lady Dee shown at the left is enhanced by the
use of many of small, custom made deck details. (Unfortunately.
the builder did not pllt his name all the photo.)
239

•• Oi,., ... ~
..
-

:::.:-~~_~__
. ~Z~.I.:~;z~~~~;::::y;. :9"-'l'~~1'/.r9'~l'~/.Z"
;--.:...~
~O

.. . . "'0
. . . . . . .'. . . ."'1. .

.. J . . - ...

-4

, • •

... :
:

?;!~ioo.~' .~1 "!o'~<r: 1
~ / . " _~

•

-

I .

_____===::::::

'/ij,///ij/.
-L J " '////h,. ~

Many people enjoy making small models oftools found in the shop. Kurt Schulz a/Harper Woods, Michigan
modeled this miniature height gage and surface table.

Here are some more miniature tools by Dennis Scherf of Cedarburg,
Wisconsin. The tool set above contains a sparkplug and wrench, micrometer,

socket sel, drill press vise and oil cans. (A more detailed shot of the
micrometer can be seen on page JJ.) At the right is an oxylacetylene welding
rig. Dennis builds models for friends in different trades.
240

SECTION 4-OTHER MACHINING TOPICS
Craftsman Profiles-Dan Lutl and Paul WhiteTwo aircraft modelers with totally different
approaches to their hobby ................... 242

I. Seuing up a sma ll workshop ..................... 247
2. Lathe and mill adjustment and maintenance . ......... 25 1

3. Engineering drawings ........................... 259
4 . Frequently asked questions ...................... 265
5. Making a business out of a hobby.. Joe Martin's
and Sherline's story ........................ 273
6. CNC in the home shop ................. . ....... 309
Model airplane craftsman and
model engine restorer Dan Lutz
buill this amphibian For a look
at his extensive antique model
airplane engine collection alld
~paciolls silop, see (hejol/owing
Craftsman Profile.

Paul White is afriend of Dan s
and another aircraft modeler.
but two people couldn'l
approach the same hobby in
more different ways . Paul's
tiny mobile home shop IIIms
out an amazing variety and
quality of models, and his
background is a story in itself
His profile follows Dan's as a
study in contrasts.
241

Craftsman Prafile by Craig libuse

DAN LUTZ••• Restoring colledible treasures
- - -- - - -..., (Left) Dan Lutz's spacious
shop has plenty of room for
his restored Fords andjlying
mode/so The wide aisle and
clean, flat floor make
wheelchair access easy.

(Below) Dan at his
workbench. A window,
plenly of Iighl and loIs of
room make this a pleasant
place to spend time. A small
jloor heater takes the chill off
in wintertime.

alking into Dan Lutz ' s large Fallbrook,
California, shop is like walking into a
museum. Down one wall are three beautifully
restored Ford automobiles dating from the 1930's.
Hanging from the ceiling is a collection of
masterfully built model aircraft ranging from small
free-flight models up to a quarter-scale biplane.
Cabinets contain collections of newer collectible
model aircraft engines and the wall sports posters
for car shows and ads for old model airplane engines.
Inside the house, packed into one oak display case,
is what now occupies most of Dan' s time and
interest...an impressive collection of very rare
vintage model airp lane engines and several cast
aluminum gas engine powered race cars.

W

For many years Dan has been collecting and
restoring these engines. In many cases this means
buying an old engine at a garage sale or swap meet
and making from scratch all the parts that are
missing. Most of these engines are very rare, and
spare parts are simply not available. Dan works from
old ads, magazines and photos. When possible, he
borrows a complete engine from another collector
and then measures and duplicates each missing part.
His spacious shop is not overflowing with tools. He
has a miniature lathe, a modest se lection of
242

accessories and a few other small shop tools. All
are set up on a simple bench where everything he
needs is easily accessible from his wheelchair. The
auto accident in 1983 that left Dan a paraplegic did
not dampen his spirit for modeling or reduce the
quality of his craftsmanship. All it did was scale
down the size of his projects. Instead of restoring
cars, now he restores miniature aircraft engines. In
fact, after his accident and therapy, he took on the
project of building the impressive quarter-scale
biplane. The completion of that project restored
much of his confidence. He says, "I figured ifI could
build that, I could do just about anything I needed."
Looking at the extent of Dan's collection and the
quality of his work, there does indeed seem to be
nothing he can't do.

Clockwise from above: A rare ELF-4 from
1941 called the "Goose Egg ". Less than 60
were built. Dan with the ELF-4 along with
his impressive collection of engines. The
engine collection also includes some
attractive aluminum race cars. Another rare
ELF-4; this one known as the "Pipe Model" .
Again, less than 60 were made. A Trojan
Junior . 19 cubic inch enginefrom 1938. Dan
scratch-built a number of components to
restore the engine to its original condition.
243

Craft, man Prafife by Craig libuse

PAUL WHITE ••• Aprolific craftsman driven by challenge
....-...., Paul displays work spanning

~qr--

sixty years of modeling from
193810 1998~ In one hand is
a plane similar 10 his first
rubber powered/lying model.
In the other is his latest

scratch buill jet engine.
Working on real race cars
and aircraft has taught Paul

many skills. While crashing a
model is always an unhappy
event, the results ofa mislake

on the real thing can be much
more serious. The malta on
his shop wall says, "Don 't gel
in a hurry! "

aul White and Dan Lutz are friends, but unlike
Dan's shop, Paul ' s will never be confused with

P In fact, he is in no danger of Good
a museum.
Housekeeping suddenly bestowing their "Seal of
Approval" on his shop. It is probably as cluttered
and cramped as any you will ever see. As Paul says,
"At least everything is within ann ' s reach." The
difference between Paul's shop and most others,
however, is in the quality, quantity and variety of
the work that comes to life here.
From the outside, Paul's mobile home looks pretty
much like the others that line the rows of the neat
park which overlooks Vista, California and the
distant mountains. Step inside, however, and you
are greeted with a decor that could best be described
as "work in progress". You must practically tum
sideways to edge down the aisle between completed
and partially built model aircraft parts to reach his
shop at the end of the coach. A towel hangs across
the entrance, and as you push it aside, you enter the
shop of a man driven to create. Paul never stops or
even slows down, and putting away tools is too much
of a distraction to the work at hand. On the bench is
a scale T-38 jet model that nears completion. A
ducted fan engine is on another bench ready to go
into the plane. It will power the model to speeds of
244

around 230 MPH. A scratch-built landing gear
assembly for a carbon fiber model U2 spyplane.
including working brakes, suspension and gear door
actuators sits on the work area. Also on the bench is
a model jet engine that Paul built from scratch.
The precision required to build ajet engine that will
actually run is pretty much beyond the skill level of
most modelers, but Paul has done it. From the hand
shaped turbine fins to the molded carbon fiber inlet
and "cold" end components, he made every piece.
The amazing thing is that what might take other
modelers years, Paul completes in days or weeks.
When he starts on a project, he dives in with an
intensity that shuts out all else. Being a bachelor,
his schedule is his alone to set. He will often work
twelve hours or more a day on a project that has his
interest.
Paul's background is far from ordinary. He started
out with model aircraft as a kid, building a rubber
band powered aircraft at age eight. He went on to
build full size race cars and airplanes. He worked in
Dan Gurney ' s race car shop in the 1960's. They built
25 to 30 IndyCars and 5 or 6 Fonnula One cars one
year. He helped build the only Fonnula One car ever
made in America and driven by an American driver
to win a Fonnula One race-Dan Gurney's Eagle.

For those who might have been
intimidated by some of the
immaculate and spacious shops
shown elsewhere in this book,
Paul 's shop offers hope. Despite
the cramped size and cluttered
work surfaces, so much good
work comes out of this shop that
Paul just never seems to find the
lime to clean up.

He also built or worked on cars for Lloyd Ruby and
several other Indy legends. Recently, he resurrected
the old 1974 Frank Fiore designed "Spyder" IndyCar
that is now raced by Joe Martin under Sherline
sponsorship in vintage sports car races.

Project: Carbon liber U2 spyplane

Paul has also built fifteen full-size aircraft, and some
very special ones at that. Two of his planes won the
"Grand Champion" award at the EAA (Experimental
Aircraft Association) meet in Oskosh, Wisconsin
in 1974 and 1978. In 1975, an aircraft he helped
build for Phil Kraft called "Superfly" won as best
aerobatic aircraft. He also restored a racer called
"Shoestring" which was the first aircraft to tum a
250 MPH lap at the Reno Air Races.
Paul's miniature machine tools are about as beat up
looking as any you will ever see. Ifthere were ever
an example that it is the craftsman who produces
the work and not the tools, here it is. In the end, you
are judged by the work that comes out of your shop,
not by the neatness of your bench, and, in that regard,
Paul's "Vista Skunk Works" turns out work that
ranks with the best anywhere.

(Above right) The custom designed and built U2 is
made from carbon fiber and has a l-O-foot wingspan.
(Right) The completely home built jet engine turns
at J20, 000 RPM and sits on a detailed display stand.
245

Barry Jordan's Miniature Machine Shop

B

arry Jordan of Derby, England modeled the

Bridgeport® mill shown on page v plus these

---

other 1/5 scale tools. He machines every part from
solid stock rather than making castings. His models
have won several prizes in model engineering

exhibitions in England. The Clarkson grinder shown
here won second prize (Class 7) at the Midlands
exhibition and a silver medal (General Engineering)
in the International show, Olympia, London. It was
built in 1998.

(Left) Barry Jordan is shown with his 1/5 scale
Clarkson Mk. I tool and cutter grinder. Above is a
close-up that shows some of the model's fine detail,

' .

Barry's Archdale Type HM50 radial arm drilling
machine, also built in J998, has won three first prize
awards in model engineering contests so far.

Barry's most recent model is this Qua/lers & Smith
"Sawmaster " 6-inch power hacksaw.
246

SEGION 4- Other Machining Topiu

Chapter 1- SeHing up a small home workshop
Small size opens up many possibilities
One of the best things about working in miniature
is that you can have a workshop that doesn't take
up much more room than a standard office desk. In
fact, an old desk will work just fine. Sherline has
many customers who could afford to buy the most
expensive tools available today, but they chose to
work with miniature machine tools because they
have limited space. I also like to think they like the
quality and design of our tools and don '1 just buy
them because they are small and relatively
inexpensive. You can't put full size machines in a
high rise condo or apartment, but you can put a great
miniature machining workshop together in that spare
bedroom that isn't being used. We often use the
example of using your machine on the kitchen table
ifneed be. Machining doesn't have to be any more
messy than cooking.
We show some pictures in this chapter of people's
home shops. At the beginning of each section in this
book is a feature on a particular craftsman. Most of
them show the shop where these machinists tum out
world class work. You will notice that not much in
the way of space or accommodations is required
when it comes to setting up a miniature machine
shop.

Working in comfort makes it more fun
You can sit down and run Sherline machine tools,
but I prefer to have the tools on a bench while I sit
on a drafting stool. That way I don't have to bend
over so far if the need arises to view the work from
a different angle. I have a small shop vacuum handy
to suck up the chips produced in the machining
process. If you are new to working with tools try to
get in the habit of putting things away as soon as
you are through with them, or at least once a day. In
other words, don't be like me. Sometimes I feel like
an archeologist when I'm looking for a part I just
spent two days making; however, I am improving.
For my own shop my next purchase is going to be
one of those beautifully built wooden tool boxes.
I've always wanted one, and before this year is over,
l' II have one.
One of the nice things about having a shop at home
is that it can be a place for your friends and modeling
buddies to hang around and shoot the breeze or help

Author Joe Martin 's home workshop is in his
garage. itfealUres plentyofbellch alld storage space
and indoor/outdoor carpet on the floor to make it
easier on his legs andfeet. He prefers a bench height
work surface and a stool for sitting. A garage shop
should be heated if you live in a cold climate or
you'll end up spending little time there.
with projects. Leave room for a few comfortable
chairs and a coffee pot. Unlike a machine shop
business where money is made by the hour and
casual conversation or "BS sessions" are
discouraged during working hours, there is no time
clock to be punched in your home shop. Make it a
place where you look forward to spending time, and
if you like having friends around while you work or
plan, make room for them too.
247

PIIO"''''_

Building your tool collection
For a machinist, collecting tools can be just as
rewarding as collecting art or porcelain figurines is
for someone else. Finding small, specialized tools
at a swap meet early on a Sunday morning makes
my day. There is something about acquiring tools
in this manner that gives your collection meaning,
and I enjoy it.
One Sunday I came upon a retired machinist selling
his tools at a swap meet. It was a sad day for him.
He was being asked to give up the tools of his trade
to watch television for the rest of his life because
his wife didn't want him making a mess around the
house. T wish more retiring craftsman would tum
their trade into a hobby when they retire and work
in miniature. They may not wish to put up with the
day to day rigor of their chosen trade, but the urge
to build and create doesn't just go away when you
hit age 65. What craftsmen have really learned in
their trade is "how to get ajob done". They can take
the skills they have acquired over a lifetime and put
them to work having fun. A true craftsman has to
build and create things, just like an artist, in order
for his life to have meaning.
The good part of the story is that I came home with
a bunch of small fixtures that the machinist had built

Tim Schroeder of St. Joseph. Michigan has taken
organization to an extreme in his shop. Notice also
the base for the lathe has handles on the ends to
make it easier to move. The work surface is metal
and the backsplash keeps small parts that roll away
fromfalling down behind the bench. Accessories are
mounted on a wall board where they take up little
space and can be easily reached. All wiring is
bundled and kept neatly out of the way. Drill and
hole size charts adorn the walls.
for himself over the years. I didn't need his
standard tools, for those I already had, but it's the
"bits and pieces" that make machining easy and fun.
These are the things that can take a long time to
accumulate. For me, a workshop will never have
enough tools, and I'm fortunate to be able to buy
tools not only for my home shop but also for my
"big workshop" at Sherline Products.

Let there belight.•.and plenty of it
Lighting is just as important as any tool in a good
workshop. You have to be able to see clearly what
you are working on. The smaller the work and the
older the eyes the more important this becomes. Take
the time to install a couple oflighting fixtures in the
right place right from the start. An overhead
fluorescent "shop light" fixture gives good overall
light and a flexible halogen or other small spotlight
type light is good for shining right on the workpiece.
If you are working in a bedroom or kitchen and can't
add a fluorescent fixture, make sure the lights you
do have offer enough wattage to throw plenty of
light on your working surface. Change light bulbs
to a higher wattage if you have to.
Don't work in a cold, damp dungeon
I have the concrete floor in my shop carpeted with
"indoor/outdoor" carpeting. It didn't cost much and
chips are surprisingly easy to vacuum up. It is easy

Frederick PopeofFt. Meyers, Floriaa makes model
ships in his garage shop. He has a bench height
work surface but has built a special dropped section
to hold the lathe so he can sit in a regular chair
while working. As you can see, in Florida an air
conditioner is a more important consideration than
a heater if you want to work in your shop year
around.
248

on the feet too. Putting a workshop in a unheated
garage in an area that has cold weather is a good
way to never get anything done. Doing work like
this should be a pleasant experience. Don't suffer,
make it easy. If you are a television addict, make
room for a TV on the bench along with your tools
so you don't have to miss your favorite shows. There
aren' t any rules on how one goes about bui lding a
spot to work in when it is for pleasure. Do it your way.

GeHing material to rough size for machining
The quickest way out of this hobby is to start off
trying to cut off a short piece of2" (SOmm) bar stock
with a dull hacksaw. If you are going to work with
metal you have to have a way of cutting stock to
approximate size before starting. This can be a very
unpleasant task even with a sharp hacksaw.
Fortunately, the discount import tool companies sell
a powered band saw type cutoff saw for less than
$200 (1998). For the price they can't be beat. Cutoff

A small band Iype cutoJJsaw is·a great timesaver in
a home shop. Imported ones are amazingly cheap
and save you the drudgery of Culling Slack 10
machinable size wilh a hacksaw.

A bench grinder is a necessity for sharpening and
shaping lools. It generales highly abrasive dUSI and
should be kept away from your good lools.

saws don't have to be in the workshop near you.
They can beaut of the way with the bar stock you'll
probably acquire. A cold garage can be just fine.
You won't be using it all that often, so it doesn' t
need to be located right next to your workspace.
What I like about this type of cutoff saw is that it
can be tipped to a vertical position and used like a
standard band saw. It really is a must for metal
workers.

You'll need a way to grind tools and deburr parts
Another basic too) that is required is a shop grinder.
(See "Grinding your own tool bits" on page 77.)
Under no circumstances should you ever operate a
grinder without eye protection! Sharpening and
reshaping cutting tools is a basic operation of
machining. Don't buy one so small it makes tool bit
grinding difficult. Look closely at the quality of the
tool supports and how easy they are to adjust. A
grinder mounted on a pedestal out by your cutoff
saw wi ll keep your immediate work area free from
the grinding dust which seems to find its way into
everything. Another tool that I find very useful is
the small one-inch wide belt sanders that have
recently become available to the home hobbyist.
They are great for deburring rough stock, and I keep
finding new uses for mine.
Rust is your enemy
A can of WD40 or simi lar rust preventative should
always be handy to keep your tools from getting
rusty. If you find a spot of rust forming on a too l
take the time to clean it off immediately with a
Scotchbrite™ or similar abrasive pad. Having to
249

companies. Now I don't waste any time driving
around trying to find a left handed tap, for instance,
that could be easily ordered from a mail order house.

Inspeding and storing finished parts
Have a special place in your shop to inspect parts
and keep parts or projects that have been completed.
I found if you have a complex project to do and you
start working on too many things at the same time,
frustration builds up, and you get the feeling you'll
never get the job done. By completing the individual
parts one at a time, inspecting them and putting them
in a special place you feel like you are making some
progress. Completion of the project then seems
possible.

A small belt sander is an excellent toolfor deburring
edges. You 'f/ find many uses for it once you have
olle. A hand-held rotary grinder is a very handy
piece of equipment to have on hand as well.
work with rusty looking tools takes the fun out of it.
Tools should be a little oily to keep them rust free.

Buying cutting tools by phone or mail
Very few people will live in an area that has cutting
tools available where they can drive to the store and
buy them as they need them. You'll waste a lot of
time and energy discovering these items are not
stocked in your local hardware store. Find a mail
order industrial supplier for cutting tools and a
company that sells metal by the foot through mail
order. Before starting a project, figure out what you
need and order it before you start. I'm sure you have
heard horror stories about people ordering from mail
order companies, but these weren't industrial
supply houses. I've never ordered from an
industrial supply house that has given me such bad
service that I wouldn't order again from them. When
I first moved from the Los Angeles area to North
San Diego County I became very frustrated because
I couldn't run out to the store and buy what I needed.
I soon realized that I could order whatever I needed
and ha ve it the next day, if needed, by using these

250

In Joe's shop, an area is set asidefor measurement.
Keeping delicate gages separate from the dust and
chips of the work area makes them easier to keep
clean. The area should be very well lit so that small
imperfections are easy to spot.

Using teamwork to complete
complicated, long term projeds
One of the things I would like to see take place in
the future is a group of home shop machinists taking
on complex projects as a group to build items for
museums or for sale to collectors. I believe
completing projects on a time schedule with a group
of other talented people would give some people
the interaction that may be missing after one retires.
In the future, the use of the fax machine and the
World Wide Web will give us all a way of
communicating to allow this to happen. Let's face
it, your fellow builders aren't likely to live in the
same city with you, never mind next door. However
you may chose to pursue this hobby, it should be
rewarding, or, better yet, just plain fun.

SEGION 4- Other Machining Tapin

Chapter 2- Tool adiustments and maintenance
K
eeping your machine in shape

to the bed of the lathe, not the tailstock. Remove
the headstock and clean any oi l from the alignment
key and slot and from the area of contact between
bed and headstock. Replace the headstock, pushing
squarely against the key and retighten. Take a light
test cut on a piece of 112" to 3/4" diameter by 3"
long aluminum stock held in a 3-j aw chuck. Use a
sharp pointed tool to keep cutting loads low so as
not to cause any deflection of the part. Measure the
diameter of both machined ends. If there is a
difference, the headstock is not perfectly square.
Now, without removing the key, tap the headstock
on the left front side with a mallet if the part is larger
at the outer end. (Tap on the right side if the part is
larger at the headstock end.) You are trying to
rotate the headstock ever so slightly when viewed
from the top until the machine cuts as straight as
you can measure. The re should be enough
movement available without removing the key, as
its factory placement is quite accurate.

Regardless of size or cost of machine tools, they
will need adjustments to remain accurate. A tight
tolerance part will require a machine that has been
properly adjusted before starting a cut. The short
travels of tabletop machine tools may make your
job easier. AI" (2Smm) long cut that is .0005"
(.Olmm) off may well be within the tolerance of
the part. That same degree of accuracy on a large

machine making a 12" (30Srrun) long cut would put
you .006" (.1 Smm) off at the end of your cut. This
wou ld be unacceptable. Adjustment procedures are
similar regardless of the size of the machine. Make
this a priority to keep your machine in adjustment.

ALIGNING THE lATHE
HEADSTOCK AND TAILSTOCK
Aminor compromise to gain vanatility
The versatile feature of Sherline machines that
allows the headstock to be removed or rotated for
taper turning and ang le milling can keep the
headstock from perfect alignment. Precision ground
alignment keys are now used to make the machines
accurate. In standard form, alignment should be
within .003" (.OSmm). This should be more than
acceptable for most jobs you will attempt.

Take another test cut and c heck. Repeat this
procedure until you have achieved the level of
perfection you seek. Then stand the lathe on end
with the alignment key pointing up and put a few
drops of LocTite™ on the joint between key and
headstock. Capillary action will draw the sealant in,
and when it hardens, the key will be locked in place.

Maximizing accuracy
Rather than talking of "perfect" ali gnment,
machinists speak instead in tenns of "tolerances",
because no method of measurement is totally
without error. We believe the tolerances of your
machine are sufficient for the work for which it was
intended; however, for those searching for more
accuracy, here are some tips for improving the
accuracy of your machine.
Loosen the headstock, push it back evenly against
the alignment key and retighten. This will assure
factory settings. To achieve greater accuracy, you
would have to sacrifice one of the better features of
your lathe or mill; that is, the ability to rotate the
headstock.
HEADSTOCK-To improve headstock alignment
the headstock must first be perfectly aligned and
locked in place. First the headstock has to be aligned

Complicated projects with many parts that must fit
and work together require tight tolerances. This JI9
scale V-8 engine is only 4" (JO.J6cm) long and was
built by Eric Whittle.
251

We prefer this method to " pinning" the head with
1/8" dowel pins, because it offers you the option to
change your mind. The headstock can be removed
by prying with a screwdriver blade in the slot
between the bottom of the headstock and the lathe
bed to break the LocTite™ loose the next time you
wish to rotate the headstock.

TAILSTOCK- Once the headstock is aligned with
the bed, the tailstock can be aligned with the
headstock. First make sure that there are no chips
caught in the dovetail of the bed and the tailstock
spindle taper is free from chips or dents. Now put a
6" long piece between centers and take a long, light
test cut. Measurements at either end will tell you if
you need to make an adjustment. A light tap from a
mallet to the appropriate side of the tailstock may
bring your tailstock to acceptable tolerances.
Disengage the tailstock from the aligning shaft (your
workpiece) before using the mallet. Another choice
is using an adjustable tailstock tool holder in the
tailstock to achieve better tailstock alignment. We
manufacture adjustable tailstock tool holders and an
adjustable live center which can help you attain near
perfect alignment at the tailstock should your job
require it.
Remember that unless you drill very small holes
(less than 1/64") or tum a lot of long shafts, locking
your headstock in position means you are giving up
a very useful feature to solve a problem which can
usually be handled with a few passes of a good mill
file. The inaccuracy inherent in any drill chuck is
such that perfect machine alignment is meaningless
unless you use adjustable tailstock tool holders.

Adjustable ,ailstoc:k 100is make it possible 10 attain
alignment between headstock and tailstock that
approaches perfection. Alignment errors are
reduced to the point where your abiliry to measure
them becomes the limiting/aclor.
front and rear halves can be adjusted slightly in
relation to each other, allowing you 1("1 compensate
for minor misalignment between head- and tailstock.
Complete instructions can be found for their
adjustment beginning on page 142.

SQUARING UP A MILL
Size and price don't motter
For many jobs, the factory alignment of your mill
will be sufficient. When you want "perfection" in
mill alignment, the ball game changes. This is true
whether you are working with an inexpensive
Sherline mill or a big $20,000 shop mill. You can't
expect to work within tolerances of .001" unless you
have your machine square. On the Sherline mill a
few shims and a dial indicator should get your
machine square if you have something square to
work to, preferably a small precision square. There
is no adjustment for the X-axis in relation to the
Y-axis, but these have been accurately machined at
the factory. The vertical slide should be square with
the table and the head and spindle should be square
with the vertical slide. Remember that the size of
the part has a lot to do with how square the machine
has to be.

ADJUSTABLE TAILSTOCK TOOL HOLDERS
When you need alignment that is dead-on
For most jobs you do, the factory alignment of your
lathe will be sufficient. When you need alignment
between headstock and tailstock that approaches
"perfection", the final adjustment can be made at
the tail stock end using these simple tools. There are
versions for the Sheriine lathe which hold a live
center, a drill chuck or a bushing which you
machine to hold a tool of your choice. In every case,
they are adjusted the same.
The principle is simple. One half holds the tool, the
other half mounts to the tailstock spindle. A flange
on the end of each half mates in the middle. The
mounting holes have just enough clearance that the

Checking the table for flatness
The first place to start to align your Sherline mill is
to run an indicator on the work table to check for
flatness. Move the "X" and "Y" axes independently
to detennine any error. These errors can be easily
252

Checking the vertical alignment of the column bed against the sides of a known square pari.

Align the head with the rest of the machine
With the vertical bed aligned with the base, the head
can be aligned to the rest of the machine by
"sweeping" the head in. The rotary table will also
givc a good surface to indicate in. Clamp the
indicator in the spindle as shown in the photos. The
head should be fairly square but can be improved
upon by using the slight amount of play on the
alignment key to square it up on the X-axis and a
shim between the head and saddle (if needed) on
the Y-axis.

eliminated with shims so the work runs perfectly
true. Normally, this isn't necessary, but we are
talking here about "perfection".
Align the vertical bed
To align the vertical bed with the X and Y slides,
mount something to the table that you are sure is
square. With an indicator mounted to the head, move
the head up and down a couple of inches with the
indicator reading a known square that is set up to
read in the X-axis direction. With the four screws
that hold the steel bed to the column block, adjust
the bed until there is a minimum indicator
movement. The Y-axis direction can be corrected
with a shim between the column block and the mill
base using the same method.

Most jobs can usually be done without going through
the process outlined above and using the machine
as it comes. I' m only trying to educate you to what
it takes to work at a precision level of machining.
253

Using the indicator against the table. align the head with the rest of the machine. The indicator is rotated
to either side to check the Y-axis. Then the table can be crankedforward and back with the X-axis handwheel
and the spindle again rotated to check fore and aft alignment with the indicator.

No toolmaker worth hi s salt wou ld attempt to build
a close tolerance part without first squari ng the
spindle of his vertical mill.

is the case, loosen the set screw and index the
handwheell /3 tum so you don ' t pick up the old set
screw mark. Push the handwheel and the leadscrew
towards one another and tighten the handwheel set
screw.
About the Saddle Nut
The saddle nut is made of brass and designed to be
an easily replaced item. It is drilled and tapped to
match the Sherline lathe and mil1leadscrews which
are 3/8-20 left-hand threads (Metric: 1Omm x I mm

SADDLE NUT REPLACEMENT
First of all, are you sure that's really the problem?
Before replacing the saddle nut, make sure that any
excessive backlash you are experiencing is not
caused by a loose adjustment between the
leadscrew handwheel and its thrust support. If this
254

LH.). The reason they have a left-hand thread is so
that the slide will move away from the operator when
the handwheel is turned in a clockwise direction.
This is standard practice for machine tools, small or
large.

Replacing the lathe ar Mill Saddle Nut
Remove the headstock/motor assembly. (Refer to
the parts diagrams on pages 328 and 329.) On the
lathe, remove the bed by removing the 10-32 socket
head screws (PIN 4051) from the inside bottom of
the lathe base. These two screws hold the bed to the
base. Be sure to note washer placement on these
screws during disassembly. It is important that they
are reassembled the same way, as the washers are
used as spacers to keep the screw from hitting the
lead screw. (From here on, these instructions apply
to both the lathe and the mil!.) Next remove the
10-32 socket head screw (PIN 4067) that holds the
saddle nut to the lathe saddle.

The saddle nut is a brass part that is located on the
back of the mill or underneath the lathe bed and
connects the saddle to the leadscrew. It is softer than
the leadscrew so it wears oul first, but is designed
to be inexpensive and easily replaceable.
leadscrew close to the support (PIN 4030), loosen
these two screws and slide the saddle (PIN 4091)
into position over the saddle nut. Put the 10-32
socket head cap screw through the saddle and screw
it into the saddle nut, but do not tighten it yet.

The entire leadscrew assembly may be removed by
removing the 10-32 flat head screw that is located
on the top of the lathe bed near the leadscrew
handwheel or the front of the mill bed near the
Z-axis handwhee!. At this time, it is a good idea to
clean up the machine.

Adjust the set screws until the flat points touch the
saddle nut and then tighten the 10-32 socket head
cap screw. Watch as you tighten to see that the screw
doesn't move. Ifit does, loosen and readjust the other
set screws.

Loosen the set screw holding the handwheel in place
and remove the leadscrew from the assembly. This
will allow you to remove the saddle nut from the
leadscrew. Note the direction it faces before
removing, and remove the saddle nut from the
handwheel end of the leadscrew.

What we are attempting to accomplish is to have
the saddle nut ride on the leadscrew with the
minimum amount of drag. You can check the drag
by turning the leadscrew handwheel. If you feel drag,
tighten or loosen a single set screw while moving
the saddle with the handwheel until the handwheel
turns freely, but keep the saddle close to the
handwhee!. If you adjust the saddle nut while it is
in the center of the leadscrew, it may be slightly
off-center but will feel free until the saddle gets close
to either end of its travel. Here, the leadscrew is
supported and cannot deflect, so it will bind. If you
can't eliminate the binding, try tapping the saddle
nut with a plastic hammer on the leadscrew side
while the saddle nut is tightly attached to the saddle
and readjust. Don't use the machine with a loose
saddle nut as this will cause excessive wear and
backlash. If you can't seem to find the correct setting

Thread on the new saddle nut, remembering that the
leadscrew has a left handed thread. Thread the saddle
nut approximately I" (25mm) onto the leadscrew
and put the leadscrew assembly back together. Make
sure the handwheel is pushed all the way on before
tightening the set screw or your machine will have
excess backlash. Do not attach the base to the bed
until the saddle nut has been adjusted.

Adjusting the Saddle Nut
The adjustment for the saddle nut consists of two
flat set screws on either side of a 10-32 socket head
cap screw. With the saddle nut located on the
255

This 9-cylinder radial airplane engine made by
Charles Herman missed winning first place in the
1994 Sherfine Machinist's Challenge by only eight
votes.

This cutaway of the headstock show.,' the locaaon
ofthe preload nul and the bearings.

yourself, se nd the bed/leadsc rew/handwhe el
assembly back to Sherline and it will be installed
for you for $10.00 handling plus shipping charges.

back the preload nut oft 4° of rotation (counterclockwise). The bearings are lightly pressed into the
case, so the inner race will not move without a sharp
tap with a plastic mallet to the end of the spindle
where the pulley is attached.

PRELOAD NUT ADJUSTMENT

If the bearings are too loose

Removing end play from the spindle

If any end play develops in the main spindle on a
Sherli ne machine, it can be easily eliminated by
readjusting the preload nut. (See PIN 4016 in the
ex pl oded views on page 328 and 329.) When the
headstocks are assembled at the factory, the preload
nut is adjusted to .0002" (.OOSmm) of end play. This
is controlled by the outer races of the bearing being
held apart by the headstock case and the inner races
being pulled together by the preload nut. This setting
was determined throu gh ex perience and, like
everything in engineering, it is a compromise. If the
machine is only to be run at high speed, this setting
may be too "tight". The headstock will run fairly
wann to the touch nonnally, but extended periods
of high speed operation may bring about excessive
temperature. If this is your case, tension on the
preload nut may be reduced slightly.
If the bearings are too tight
To change the adjustment, remove the spindle
pulley, loosen the set screw in the preload nut and
256

If you find the bearings are too loose. you may want
to take up on the end play. You can check them
with an indicator or by spinning the spindle without
the motor belt engaged. If the spindle spins freely
with a chuck or faceplate on it. it is too loose for
nonnal work. Adjust the preload nut until it turns
approximately 1-1/2 turns when spun by hand.

GIB ADJUSTMENT AND REPLACEMENT
Building up an evenly worn gib

The gib material we use contains a lubricant and
should wear almost indefinitely with nonnal use .
The only reasons you would replace a gib would be
if it is broken or if it goes in to the maximum
adjustment and the slide is still loose. Breaking one
while it is in place on the machine would be almost
impossible, and a gib that goes in too far can often
be corrected by removing it and putting one or two
layers of Mylar tape on the back side (the side that
doesn't wear against the dovetail) to build up the

thickness. This should be done neatly and any
excess tape trimmed off with a hobby knife.

Replacing the gibs
Thc gibs arc molded from a composite material.
Their purpose is to make final adjustment on
machine tool dovetails to compensate for tolerances
and wear. Sherline's gibs are molded in a 5-3/4"
length and each end is cut off to fit the particular
slide on which it is being used. The gib that fits
against the bed on the lathe and mill column is
eli fferent from the gibs used on the lathe crosslide
and XY base of the milL
LATHE (ROSSlIDE, Mill "X~ AND "'(" ms

SADDlE~lll

AND LATHE

The saddle gib material has a slightly thinner cross
section than that used for the lathe crosslide and
mill X- and Y-axes.
Before removing the old gib, make sure you
understand the way it works. A corresponding angle
has been machined into the slide where the gib is
located. On your Sherline tool, there is also a
difference in angle between the front and back
surfaces of the gib. This keeps the gib in place in all
directions with just one simple gib lock.
Gibs must be held in place so they can't tighten or
loosen. On Sherline tools, they are held with a
PIN 4082 gib lock. Drilling the hole for this lock
will be the only difficult part of the replacement
procedure. We have fixtures at the factory to do this
job, but it can be done at home with a little care.
After removing the old gib, clean the slide and
lubricate with a light oil. Push the smaller end of
the gib material into the slot from the end that has
the gib lock. This is the larger end. Make sure there
isn't any "play" between the gib and dovetail and
that the slide can still move. Check each end of the
gib by moving it up and down in the slot to make
sure it fights tightly.
The tapers and angles are machined quite accurately
and should work without further fitting when
installed. Iffor some reason this is not the case, the
fit can be improved by removing a very small
amount of material from the end that is too thick.
257

Material can be removed by scraping using a sharp
utility knife blade held vertically to the gib surface.
Scrape to remove material from the end opposite
the end that is loose. The same thing can be
accomplished with 320 grit wet/dry sandpaper. Place
the sandpaper face up on a flat surface and rub the
end of the gib opposite the one that is loose. Once
satisfied with the fit, mark the gib on each end where
it exits the saddle.
Drill a 3/32" or .093" (2.36mm) diameter hole for
the gib lock .400" (lOmm) from the mark that
represents the position the slide will fit the gib. The
location and angle can be detennined from the old
gib. The hard part is drilling the hole into an angled
surface. A center drill is a must for this job. You
may want to tack glue each end of the gib to
something that can be held in a vise to make it easier
to work on. The part can then be broken loose from
the glue when the drilling is done. The glued ends
will be sawed off when the gib is trimmed to size.
The hole can also be drilled slightly oversize and
filled with epoxy. Put wax on the gib lock where it
goes into the hole so the epoxy won't stick to it.
The epoxy will fill the void and the lock will be
properly located. Whatever your choice of methods,
the gib lock cannot keep the gib from fitting
properly. Once the hole is drilled, use a hack saw or
hobby saw to cut off the excess material on the marks
you made previously. Install the gib and gib lock,
tighten the set screw that holds the gib lock in place,
and you're ready to go back to work.
I hope that this will help you fit up a new gib. Should
you find the job to be more than you wish to
attempt, you may return the lathe or mill to
Sherline and they will fit up new gibs for a nominal
labor charge plus return shipping cost.
Improving fit on a worn lathe bed or mill column
A slide that is loose in one place and binds in
another is a sign that the bed is worn, nonnally in
the middle where most of the movement occurs. If
you are a good craftsman, you may improve the fit
with a sharp, flat, fine pitched mill file. Using the
file flat on both top rails of the bed, remove a small .
amount of material from the thick end or ends until
the slide moves freely throughout its travel. The
worst that can happen is you could end up buying a
new bed, which would have been the case anyway.

the Sherline lathe or mill it should be about .003" to

SHERLINE'S TWO·SPEED PULLEY

,005" (.08mm to ,12mm).

Extra torque at low RPM
Sherline tools built after 1994 which have the DC

motor in place of the older AC/DC rnotofuse a twoposition pulley system. The normal pulley position,
which is with the belt on the larger motor pulley

and smaller headstock pulley, will suffice for most
cfyour machining work. Moving the belt to the other
position (smaller motor pulley, larger headstock

pulley) will provide additional torque at lower RPM.
It is particularly useful when turning larger
diameter parts with the optional riser block in place.
Changing the belt from one position to the other

only requires a few minutes. Instructions on how to
change the belt position are included with each
machine.

A
(lII0I01')
"

"

"
,

/

B

(beads104:k)

,

+

'

",

ffi

The two pulley positions. Position "A" is the normal
setting for most work. Position "8 " offers more
torque at low RPM.
To achieve power at low RPM, older machines used
a special "low speed attachment" which geared them
down for more power. For high RPM a "high speed
attachment" was availabl.e which geared them up.
The newer DC machines have a motor powerful
enough and a speed range broad enough to
eliminate the need for these accessories, although
they are sti ll available for older machines.

For Example:
You are turning a bar to .600" diameter. The bar
now measures .622" which requires a cut of .011"
to bring it to a finished diameter of .600". Ifthe user
inadvertently turns the handwheel .0 12" instead of

,0 II ", he couldn 't reverse the hand wheel just .00 I"
to correct the error. The handwheel would have to
be reversed for an amount greater than the backlash
in the feed screws before resetting the handwheel to
its proper position.

Adjusting the mill anti-backlash nuts.
Backlash on the X- and Y-axes of the mill may be
reduced to a minimum by adjustment on the ant ibacklash nuts. These nuts are located o n the
handwheel ends of the mill sadd le. The nuts are
secured by slotted pan head screws which hold a
pointed locking plate that interlocks with teeth on
the nut. To adjust back lash, simply loosen the pan
head screw and slide the locking plate to one side.
Rotate the ant i-back lash nut clockwise on the
X-axis and counterclockwise on the V-axis until
snug. Replace the locking plate and ti ghten the pan
head screw. With the anti-backlash nuts properly
adjusted, the lead screws will tum smoothly and have
no more than the proper .003" to .005" of backlash.

BACKlASH ADJUSTMENTS
How much handwheel backlash is acceptable?
Backlash is the amount the handwheel can tum
before the slide starts to move when changing
directions. This is a fact oflife on any machine tool
and must be allowed for. On small machines like

A cross section ofthe mill saddle shows the location
ofthe leadscrew adjustments.

258

SEmON 4- Other Machining T
opi~'

Chapter 3- Engineering drawings By Craig libuse
work, however, the quality of the information given
is more important. Perfectly formed letters are of
little use if they convey the wrong data. Today, a
new option is available with computer drafting
programs such as "AutoCad"® . These programs
have eliminated much of the "art" of drafting and
have turned the trade toward s des igning and
engineering. The difference in the quality of the
drawings from one person to the next has become
less because the computer and printer or plotter do
the actual line work. It should be noted that good
artists will always be able to express their skills with
the tools with which they have to work, be they pen
or computer.

Computers trade input speed for flexibility
An ideal setup for drafting-a large work surface,
good light, plenty a/templates and a sturdy drafting
machine. Most home shops can '[ afford the luxury
of this much space unless you really enjoy doing
drawings. Since most professional drafting is now
done on the computer, drafting boards can be found
at good prices on the used markel.

Part drawings-the machinist's "sheet music"
A mechanical drawing is to a machinist what sheet
music is to a musician. It is a graphic language used
as the most clear and concise way of presenting all

the infonnation needed to get the job done. Drawings
will show the shapes, dimensions and tolerances
needed to produce a part that will fit with mating
parts as intended by engineering. A skilled musician
can playa piece properly the first time ifall the notes
and notations are included with the sheet music.
Likewise, a skilled machinist should be able to
produce a good part the first time with a good set of
drawings. These ski ll s need constant practice. A
"sour note" on a machine tool can be expensive.

Traditional pen and ink drahing vs.
(omputer drawing programs
Most boys who went to high school in the 50's and
60's had to take at least one drafting course. (I don't
think there was a rule against it, but I can't remember
any girls in my drafting classes.) Drafting classes
taught the use of traditional drawing tools to make
pencil or ink drawings on paper. A traditional
drawing can be judged by the quality of the line

259

For me it is still faster to make most simple drawings
using a traditional drafting board. The big
advantage of computer drafting is making changes.
A change on a computer drawing is clean, quick
and simple. A good program can automatically
update all related changes, helping you to avoid
mistakes. Sophisticated design programs can even
warn you if you design a part that can't work. A
change that could ruin your beautiful ink drawing
isn't any problem on a computer. After making the
changes you just print out a new drawing. Complex
drawings and the changes that may take place down
the line will make the additional time it takes to input
information a good investment. Another advantage
is storing drawings on disks that allow instant
access, eliminating the need for storage space and a
large file of ink drawings.

CAD·CAM in industry
A system called CAD-CAM which stands for
"Computer Aided Design- Computer Aided
Manufacturing" is in use today. Computer drawings
are linked directly to the production machines that
make the parts. These machines get their
programming information directly from the
computer, eliminating many steps in the design
process. Complex projects, such as designing a new
aircraft, would be impossible without the benefits
of a computer. Parts can actually be test fitted and
checked for interference in a 3-dimensional drafting
program. Complicated shapes can be designed in
3-D before any metal is cut. Many potential mistakes

can be eliminated before the first prototype is made.
Obviously, this is far beyond the needs of a home
project, but computer drafting programs continue
to get less expensive and easier to use. There are
computer modeling programs that interface with
machines which will cut a prototype part from wax
or plastic directly from the computer drawings. This
is a quick and inexpensive way laborwise to get a
mockup of your part you can hold in your hands.
The equipment it takes to accomplish this, however,
is expensive compared to traditional machining.

,

Two types of machinists
If you have been making parts for others, you are
probably used to working with drawings. If you
design your own parts, however, you probably fall
into one of two categories. Some model makers
prefer to do detailed drawings before making the
first cut. Others start by making the first part and
fitting other parts to it. This method can only work
if your mind can visualize the entire project. A pl~n
must be drawn either in your mind or on paper
before starting. "As built" drawings may be sketched
out later with the final dimensions taken from the
part for future reference if needed. Somewhere in
between is probably where most people fall. If
you're making a part that has never existed before
you will most likely do a little sketching, work out
some of your ideas on paper and then begin cutting
a simple prototype. The more complicated the part
or expensive the material, the more thinking and
drawing you should do before you start cutting. Each
person eventually works this process out for himself.
From one extreme to the other
Wilhelm Huxhold, a retired lifelong professional
machinist, makes miniature projects of incredible
detail. He told me that he works out all the details in
hi s head while watching television. He knows
every cut he will make before he starts a project and
needs to commit very little to paper. Jeny Kieffer, a
utility company marketing representative who
started machining as a hobby several years ago,
makes extremely small and intricate projects. He
takes detailed dimensions from an actual prototype
of what he is modeling. He will also take photos
and sca le parts from them . However, when
developing a way to make a particular part, he
prefers to start cutting and says he just "plays with
something until it works". Scotty Hewitt, a threetime winner of the Sherline Machinist's Challenge
contest, works more like an artist, preferring to

., "

,,',

.,', "

"

....

, '.',

', '

.

',

'.' '

'

..

A minimum setup-a tablet of grid paper, a scale
and a straightedge is all you really need for
recording the information required to make a pari.
The part will eventually succeed or fail based on
the information in the drawing, nol the quality of
the paper or skill of the line work.
remove metal like a sculptor removes stone until
the final piece is revealed. Personally, I prefer to
make all my mistakes on paper before I waste any
material. I do detailed drawings of every part before
I build it. Of course, I have been working behind a
drafting board for 25 years and making a drawing
of something comes pretty easily. For me, seeing it
on paper makes it easy to visualize potential
problems before I get to them .
Alot depends on who the parts are for
If you are producing parts from someone else's
plans, you'll have to have a prett y good
understanding of the conventions of drafting. Ifwe
wish to pass on the infonnation about a part we have
made to others so they can duplicate it, the
mechanical drawing becomes a very important tool
for describing that part accurately. To keep track of
all the operations needed to produce Sherline tools,
for example, good drawings are a necessity.

The basic parts of a mechanical drawing
I f you know nothing about drafting, there are a few
basic elements necessary in a drawing to record all
the needed infonnation. They are the object lines of
the part itself and dimension lines and dimensions
showing the length of edges or locations of hole
centerlines. In a case where a line is hidden from
view, it is shown as a dotted line instead of solid. In
addition, the drawing should contain information
about the materials to be used, the finishes required,
260

TOP VIEW

.

,.
,

..
..
i

0,250

--r-;r

""
I

i~

.

,
,

~

I,OO~ -

t62

Fi'---'
-

.i . .'"'

o.\. e J
11:0250

0.005

::::,

'

R0281

10-:12 H2

END VIEW

SIDE VIEW

...

0017

INCH
foI(TRIC

,
,

NOT(S,
HAT [RIAl - BRASS (XTRUSIDN
BR(AK All SHARP (J)C£S 0,00511:

r

I"'"tc+<oooo
...

,m

0.563
I

.

,>5,

0117
PART M

,,,,.-.~ss
_ _ ,.,enD

,~

-

«-

3/8"-<'0

l.(n NAND

10""., It 1-0"" LErT HAND
THREAD

SHERLlN[

PRODUCTS INC

110 NAVAJO 51.

SAN "'ARCOS, CA. 92069

!~! I'

~1I"

~

~~.

SADDLE NUT

"11'~
SCALE
n ",

I I
SIZE

D~W1NG

00 "101 SCALE DRAWING

NO.

40J 7
4117

SHEEl

Figure I- A tYPical part drawmg. ThiS IS an orthographic projection done in AUloCad®. The three views
show all the information necessary to make the part. (Though drawn at full scale, it is reduced in size for
this illustration.)
the scale to which it is drawn and the tolerances
allowed in all dimensions. lnfonnation that would
be helpful to someone making the part for the first
time should also be added. By the way, in traditional
drafting, object lines are drawn darker than
dimension lines to make the part stand out. Dotted
lines have equal length dashes and centerlines use a
long-short-Iong pattern of dashes.

Drawing to scale
It would be impossible to make all drawings full
size. Parts will usually be too big or too small.
Making your drawing to an appropriate scale can
help eliminate errors. If you've conceived something
impossible to build, the error may become apparent
when it is drawn to scale. Small parts may have to
be drawn many times the actual size in order to be
able to represent all the detail. Large parts must be
sca led down to fit whatever size paper you are
working with.
26 1

Orthographic projedions
A look at the figure above will show you how a
typical part drawing is laid out. This happens to be
done in AutoCad®, but it would look pretty much
the same if it were hand drawn. This is a "threeview" drawing or orthographic projection. A part is
drawn from the top, side and end. It is as though
you placed a glass box over the part and drew on
the glass what was seen from just that side. If you
take what is drawn on the top, front and end of the
box and laid each on the table, you would have an
orthographic projection of that object. In some cases
where the part has detai ls that are hidden and are so
complicated that a lot of dotted lines would be
confusing, an additional view, cross section or inset
detail will be drawn. A reference as to where this
detail occurs is included under the detail. Ifa part is
very simple, only one or two views may be required.

SECTION A-A
O.OJ2ROR

SHARP CORNER

~AP THRU BOTH SIDES
11)-32

oe05 " 45· ..........

1

J Ql2 • 45' -.:: '-......

I.JOIl
rACE MUST BE
SMOOTH AND

0.675

:

L
O
.JS2
0.253

flAT

END VIEW

b

va.:
a
~ 1).313

x 45"

0.624

0.&25

I- '3 ~0.0I5 :
100
1.875

<S.

2.000!O.OOJ

." 0: (5.
I. MAl ( RIAL I' ROUND 12L14 STEEL

2.
J.

FINISH BLACK OXiDE
BREAK ALL SHARP (DGES 0.005
'OO'_S .... ISS
...-PlCII'II!O
NtIoC'IIOH5
00:._1l

tll3Z

SHERlIN[ PRODUCTS INC
170 H,lV,lJO ST.

SAN t.lARCOS, CA. 92069

t .. ~tL·

LEAD SCREW' THRUST
''''-E

rUll

I

SIZE

I DRo\WING
I

DO NOT SCAlE DRAWING

NO.

4030

I SHEET

FIGURE 2- A cross sectlon shows what you would see ifyou cut the part at that pomt. The "cross-hatch"
lines on the side view indicate the surface olthe cutaway. The End View has a line (A-A) indicating where
the "CUI" is made.
(ross sections

A cross section is a view of a part that would be
what you would see if you took a saw and cut the
part at that point. They can be helpful additions to
an orthographic drawing to point out details that
might be hidden or unclear in the basic drawing.
Usually the cut surface of the part is indicated with
a series of lines called "cross-hatching". In actual
drafting practice there is a convention which has
different patterns of lines to represent various
materials. This means that in a cross section of a
comp licated part, you could visually see the
difference between a bronze bushing and a steel part.
Computer programs let you use colors to see these
differences more easily on the screen.

FIGURE 3-A typical isometric
drawing of an assembly. in this
case a Sherline rotary table.
Most people can visualize a part
much better in a three-dimensional drawing than
they can from two-dimensional draWings. even if
they have a lot of experience in reading plans.

Isometric projections and isometric draWings

Isometric drawings are much easier for most people
to understand, because they give a pretty good
visual representation of the object in 3 dimensions.
262

It is special fonn of drawing and is not actually a

"perspective" drawing where objects diminish in
size as they get further away. The main axis of the
part is shown using 30° angles. A special isometric
ellipse guide is used to draw circles. The difference
between an isometric "projection" made from a
three-view drawing and an isometric "drawing" is
that , on a projection, the dimensions are
foreshortened on the isometric axes, while in an
isometric drawing they are represented as full-si ze
dimensions. Therefore, an isometric drawing will
be slightly larger than a projection of the same part.
Since a three-view drawing is not needed to construct
an isometric drawing, it is easier to do and is used
more often, although it is not quite as accurate a
representation as a projection. In either case, these
drawings make parts very easy to visualize, but they
can be somewhat difficult to draw unless you have
some drafting experience.
3-D computer drafting programs
This is a relatively new technology that is really
making designing complicated parts easier. Instead
of the traditional method of doing a three-view
drawing and then creating a three dimensional view
from that infonnation, the part is drawn directly in
three dimensions on the computer screen. It can be
rotated around and viewed from any direction just
as if you were looking at the actual part suspended
in space. Parts can be viewed in "wire frame" mode
or with texture and color mapped onto their surfaces.
Even the direction of the light source can be
manipulated to control the direction of the imaginary
shadows. Groups of parts can be assembled and
rotated too. Colors can be used to make the
individual parts easier to differentiate.
Once the parts are designed to your satisfaction, the
computer can translate the three dimensional image
into a flat orthographic projection and even apply
all the dimensions for you. Carl Hammons was
experimenting with a program like that for use on
Sherline's future parts, and it promises to be an
incredible design tool. The only drawback is that
you need a very fast computer and a big hard drive
to fully exploit the features of the program.
Exploded views
Exploded views are often used as assembly drawings
because they show all the parts and how they relate
to the others in the assembly. They kind oflook like
what you'd see if you put dynamite in the middle of
the part and then set it off, blowing the assembly
263

FIGURE 4- This 3-D drawingofa handwheel and
sensor assembly is typical of what can be done in
modern 3-D programs. This is a black and white
laser print, but the draWing can be viewed in color
on the screen and printed in color as well if you
have a color printer.
apan. Centerlines or dotted lines can be used to show
where each part or fastener goes. A tremendous
amount of information about a complicated
assembly can be learned from looking at a wellexecuted exploded view. Exploded views of the
entire Sherline lathe and mill are included in Section
5 of this book. They can be quite helpful if you arl.·
working on your machine or need to order a spa r\.·
part.

Figure 5- An expLoded view of all the parts in the
rotary table and right angle attachment makes it
easier to see how each part relates to the others.

ESfablishing pari falerances
in its intended application. An oversize part must
still fit in an undersize hole. On drawings, tolerances

tolerances are too loose, the parts won ' t fit , and if
they are too tight , th e part s m ay become too
expensive to be competitive. For more information
on tolerance s, see page 88 in the chapter on
measunng.

will be shown with a ± (plus or minus) symbol. For
example, 1.250 ±.002 would me an a part that
measures anywhere from 1.248 to 1.252 would be
acceptable with 1.250 being ideal. It could al so be
given as 1.250 +.002 - .000. That would mean the
part could be as large as J .252 but no smaller than
the 1.250 dimension . Tolerances are often omitted
from hobby drawings. Since you will be making all
the parts yourself, they can be fine-tuned until they
fit properl y, so tolerances are not as important. In
indu stry, however, establi shing tolerances is critical
to the commerc ial succ ess of a product. If the

Though no draft sman likes to admit it, the drawings
a machini st works with may occasionally have an
error in drawing or dimensioning. A good machinist
should never build parts on blind faith assuming that
th e drawing s a re p e rfe ct. D es i g n e r s, lik e
machinists, also work with thousands of dimensions,
and they can make mistakes. Don ' t make a big deal
out of it. Someday you may need to as k them to
save your butt by changing a drawing to a make a
corresponding part work.

The to lerance to whi ch a part is made determines
how much over- or undersize it can be and still work

Dealing with errors in the drawings

TOOLS FOR DRARING
that took u lot of sk ill to muster. A drawing cou ld
eusil y be ru ined whe n ink wou ld unt:xpectedl y
creep under the edge of a strai ghtedge. Drawing
c ircles with a ru ling pen in u compass was a skill
thut took u long timc to Icum . Now. eusil y tilled
pen s lik e th ose mad e h y RapidographHt
dominate the market. They huvc easy-to-cha nge
tips of varying width and C'1Il be held in spec ia l
compasses. J used one for Illany ycars. bUl now
tind thut there ure ... number o f felt tip pens that
work line for the type of drawing I do.

Scales and straight edges
Trian gular draning scale s are used to mark off
lllt:a s urt: Ill Clll s. Th cy cO lll e e ng ra ve d w ith
different sca les of measurement on cach of their
six edges to ma ke it easier to draw to different
scales . Plastic or Ill eta l strai ghtedges arc used
for drawing th t: actual lines. (It is a drafting
" no- no" to draw lines using your sc.lIe.) While
tht: old " T -squarc and triangl c" method st ill
works. a draft ing machine makes drawing angles
other than )00. -'5°. 600 and 900 a \ot easier.
Since the ad vent of computer drafting. used ones
ca n he found in plentiful suppl y at ve ry good
prices at auction s or in the newspapcrclassifieds.

Erasing mistakes and papers for drahing
As long as the drawings wi ll he reproduccl.lusing
a copy rn'lc hine. mi stukes C<Ul be covered with
"w hite-ouC in stead of the old ink eradica to rs
und sc rap in g necessary w ith India ink . Fo r
blueprint re pro du ction. mi s ta kes mu s t be
re llloved. not covered up. becau se light is shone
through the drawing paper to cxpose the spec iul
blueprint paper. Specia l drJfting papers are se mi transpure nt for traci ng and blue printing ,md have
a hard surfuce thut stand s up we ll to erasu res.
but I usua ll y work o n plain hond copier paper.
A lmost ull of the drawing s fo r thi s hook were
done using just a fe lt tip pen and bond paper.

Pencils and draWing pens
Traditionall y. wooden pencils of varying degrees
o f hardness wen: used for layout a nd tina llines.
The y were kept sharp or the tip shuped with a
piece o f sandpape r. Now . the mechanical pencil
with it s easily rt:placeab le O.5 mm leads makes
the joh much s impler. I usuall y usc HB lead
whid offers a good compromi se between the
harder H leads and sofie r B grades of le ...d. (4H
is very hard . -'B is ve ry so fl.) F in al draw in gs
used to be done in Indi a ink us ing a ruling pen

"No lIrli.\" is ahead olhis lime. He is his lime. It is j ust that the others are behind the lime. "

-Martha Graham
264

SECTION 4- Other Machining Topiu

Chapter 4- Frequently asked questions
High price is no guarantee of good instructions
One of my big gripes in life is the poor quality of
"question answering" done by most companies in
their instructions or literature. The price of a
machine is no indicator of the quality of instructions
you will get either. I have paid many thousands of
dollars for sophisticated machines only to find they
came with a manual that doesn't tell you how to
turn on the machine. You have to buy a service
contract or pay $150 an hour for a technician to
answer questions that should have been in the
instructions in the first place. This takes a lot of the
fun out of buying a machine. I feel that if a customer
can buy one of our machines while knowing nothing
about machining, open the box , assemble the
machine and make parts with it without ever calling
the factory to ask a question, then we have done a
pretty good job of writing the instructions. And
amazingly enough, considering how complicated
machining actually is, we do get very few calls, so
hopefully our literature is doing the job it was
intended to do.

Instructions that come with a machine too/like this
assume that the operator is already a good
machinist. However, the high price of the machine

is still no guarantee you'll gel instructions sufficient
for even an experienced craftsman to run il.

There are no stupid questions
Nevertheless, there are still certain questions that
come in regularly, mostly from people who don't
yet own a machine and are interested in knowing if
it will do the job for them. Questions about
accuracy, versatility, power of the machine or the
size of parts that can be machined on them are
common. Perhaps this section will answer a few of
those questions you might have, saving you the time
of picking up the phone and calling the company
making equipment you're thinking of buying or
bugging your machinist friends. These are not
"stupid" questions. They are all very good questions
and must be answered in your mind before you
decide to get into machining. You need to know if
the machine you are thinking of buying will do the
job for the kind of parts you hope to make. If you
are a beginner, hopefully these questions and
answers will put to rest some ofthe things you have
been wanting to ask. As I have said before, while
these answers are mostly directed to the capabilities
of the Sherline machines I am using as the example
throughout this book, much of the knowledge can
be applied to any small metalworking tools.

Several reasons you need good Instrudions
The main reason for writing clear instructions is that
learning to use a new tool is much easier and more
fun when the instructions are clear and all your
questions are answered. These days, the majority of
tabletop machine tools are sold through mail order.
The dealers who sell by mail order have tremendous
inventories of all kinds of products. and it would be
impossible for them to be able to answer technical
questions about every product they sell. Instead, you
expect to get good instructions when you buy a
product made by a reputable company.
Unfortunately, this isn't always the case.
Manufacturers of large machine tools can safely
assume the people that will be operating them
already have a certain amount of training and
experience. Instructions that cover the operation and
maintenance of the machine should be sufficient.
With tabletop machine tools, the user is often a firsttime machinist and has questions that extend beyond
simply operating the machine. The instructions must
be much more detailed.

265

Q: How accurate are miniature machine tools?

A: When someone asks what is the accuracy of a

machine, it is actually a rather loaded question. The
more you know about the subject , the more
difficult it becomes to answer. For example, I can
eas ily turn a diameter close to the chuck on a

Sherline lathe within .0002" (2 tenths of a thousandth
of an inch). Does this mean the machine is built to
that tolerance? No, but it does mean the leadscrew

is accurate"', the cutting tool is proper and the

diameter I am cutting is large enough not to deflect.
In many cases, the accuracy of your method of
measuring has as much to do with the accuracy of
your parts as the machine you are working on.

'" NOTE: Sherline 's leadscrews are precision rolled
and are accurate 10 within 99.97%.
The tools Sherline makes are as accurate as they
can be built without expensive grinding and heat
treating. Over a million dollars has been invested in
state-of-the-art CNC machine tools and tooling to
mass produce accurate parts. To increase the
accuracy less than I % would increase the cost by a
factor of 10, and this simply wouldn't be a good
deal for the average consumer. The jump from a
$400 lathe to a $4000 lathe of similar size yields
only a minor increase in accuracy, and often results
in a loss in versatility, as more expensive machines
are usually more specialized and few offer the
features and accessories available from Sherline.

When asking about the accuracy of the machines.
what is really being asked is, "what kind of accuracy
can I expect to achieve in the parts I make on these
machines?" When you look at the pictures in this
book showing some of the examples of the parts
made on Sherline machines, you can see that, in the
hands of a good craftsman who knows his or her
machine, the parts that can be produced are as
accurate as you will ever need. You wi ll find that
most problems associated with making very tight
tolerance parts are not caused by the machines but
rather are the result of the level of craftsmanship of
the operator. As your technique improves, you'll find
your machine keeps making better and better parts.
Even if the machine were "perfect", other things can
affect accuracy. For example, the "spring" or
deflection of the part you are making and the
deflection of the cutter also affect accuracy. Taking
all this into account, it is still not uncommon for a
good machinist to be able to make parts accurate to
within a thousandth of an inch or less on inexpensive
miniature machine tools. Keep in mind that
Sherline's lathe is a small engine lathe, not a
jeweler's lathe. If you are a hobbyist, this small
engine lathe for under $500 will be plenty accurate
and many times more useful than the most expensive
jeweler's lathe made, as they are designed for
different purposes.
Remember also that while you need a big machine
to make big parts, it is much easier to make accurate
small parts on a small machine. In addition to the
advantages of being able to sit down and get close
to your work, the smaller machine will give you a
much better "feel" for delicate work than a large
machine. For example, it is very easy to break
extremely small drills if you don't have some feel
for how fast to feed them. A large machine simply
cannot give you the "touch" you need for doing
delicate work.

Q: How accurate is the alignment of the lathe

headstock and tai/stock?

A: The biggest enemy of accuracy here is the
versati lity of the Sherline design. Because the
headstock rotates to allow taper turning, returning
it to a perfectly straight position is dependent on the
alignment of the headstock key and keyway. The
standard square key stock used for the alignment
key was recently replaced with precision ground
material which has increased the level of accuracy.

A beautiful eight spoke brass wheel made on Bob
Breslauer's jpecial double rotary table setup. A 101
of careful thought went into this design.
266

consistently make parts of that s ize , you will
probably be happier with a larger machine and more
horsepower.

Factory alignment of the headstock and tailstock is
within less than .003" or .08mm. Sherline also
manufactures adjustable tailstock tool holders and
an adjustable live center which can help you attain
near perfect alignment should your job require it.
(See pages 252 and 142.)

Removing large amounts of metal on a small
machine takes time. If you have lots of time , size of
the part is less critica l. Users of any machine are
happier with its performance when they arc not
consistently pushing the limits of its capabi liti es. If
you usually make small parts well within the
capabilities ofa 3.5" lathe and every once in a whi le
need to turn a part sized near the machine ' s limits,
you will be very satisfied with that lathe 's
performance.

Q: What is backlash and how much of it should
leadscrews have?

A: Backlash is the play in the engagement of the
leadscrew threads which allows a few thousandths
of an inch to be turned on the handwheel before the
leadscrew starts to tum when changing directions.
This is a fact of life on any machine tool and is
accounted for by always making your cuts in the
same direction and keeping track of which way you
turned the handwheel last. On Sherline tools,
backlash is usually about .003" to .005" (.OSmm to
.12mm). The X and Y leadscrewson the mill have a
backlash adjustment. but it is still recommended that
it be set to .003". (See page 257.)

A vertical milling machine is capable of holding
larger parts than a lathe because the part is held and
only the tool turns. It also has a much longer table
throw (X-axis travel) than a lathe. On a Sherline
mill with the addition of the horizontal milling
conversion, surfaces up to 6" x 9" can be machined
without moving the part. This is a very large
machinable area for a tool of this compact size.

Q: What kind of materials can I machine?

A:

There are almost no limits to the kind of
materials you can machine with a good miniature
machine tool. Anything from wood or plastic to
exotic materials like stainless steel can be cut as long
as the part can be safely and firmly held and the
proper cutting tool and cutting speed are used. (See
Section 1, Chapter 3 on materials for machining.)

Q: How powerful is the motor and what is the
speed range?

A: This is a good question to ask of any machine,
because the more powerful the motor, assuming the
design of the machine is rigid enough to handle it,
the faster metal can be removed. The 90 Volt DC
motor now used on Sherline tools offers a lot of

Q: How big a part can I work on?

A: The physical size limitations of any machine

are easy to determine from its published
specifications, but what does the hardness of the
material you wish to tum do to those numbers in
the real world? A good rule to remember when it
comes to purchasing any lathe is to take the average
diameter you plan to work with and multiply that
times 3 for free machining materials and times 4 for
tough materials like stainless steel. If the materials
you plan to work with are free machining
(aluminum, brass and free machining steel), you will
be pleased with a 3.5" lathe like the Sherlineas long
as the average part you make is approximate ly I"
(25mm) in diameter. Wood and plastic are so easy
to machine that only size limitations need be
considered. I don't mean to imply that you can't
machine a 3" flywheel, but if you are planning to

Members of the San Diego Aerospace Museum's
model staffproduce miniature parts for an aircraft
MlTO,IDUnU
exhibit in their shop.
267

when turning large parts, a second drive belt position
is available on the motor drive and headstock
pulleys. (By the way, to buy just a DC motor and
speed control of this quality elsewhere could cost
you more than the entire Sherline Model 4000 lathe!)

*NOTE: A simple RPM gage that uses the frequency
0/60 cycleJsecfluorescent fight is provided/or your
use on page 333.

Q: How heavy a cut can I make on
a 3.5" lathe?

A: This depends mostly on the diameter and type
of material you are attempting to cut. It is also
dependent on the sharpness of your cutter and the
firmness of your setup. The high torque DC motor
we use is very powerful for its size. In fact, it is
more common for people to underestimate its
abilities and feed the cuning tools too slowly, causing
the tool to "chatter". For aluminum, you could
expect to be able to take cuts of up to .060" on 3/4"
diameter stock , while stainless steel would require
taking no more than .015" with each pass. (In another
example, on free machining steel , you could take
that same .015" cut on a 3" diameter piece.) Heavy
cuts at high RPM will also cause the tool to "chatter".
Metal must be cut with enough feed to keep the cut
continuous (keep the tool biting into the metal).
Remember, rule #1 in any machining operation is:
"If the tool chatters, reduce speed (RPM), reduce
depth of cut and increase the rate offeed."

--

A miniature grinder is parI of a complete model
machine shop on display at the N.A.M.E.S. show.
Miniature tools are a popular subject for modelers
using miniature machine tools to make them.

Q: Can the lathe cut th,eads and what kind?

torque for its size. It has substantially more usable
torque and a larger speed range than the older 112
horsepower AC/DC motor that was used before
1994. The electronic speed control now adjusts
automatically for any voltage worldwide from I (){)
to 240 volts, 50 or 60 Hz. An electronic circuit in

A: Standard size threads are often cut with taps
and dies. For any other non-standard thread or any
thread you don ' t happen to have the proper tap or
die for, threads are cut on a lathe. To cut threads,
the leadscrew of the lathe must be geared to the
rotation of the spindle in the proper relationship, so
that as the spindle turns, a 60° thread cutting tool in
the toolpost advances down the part to cut the thread.
Some machines have a geartrain for thread cutting
already built in. The Sherline lathe uses a simple
thread-cutting attachment (PIN 3100) which is
capable of cutting almost any size thread. It will
machine 31 different unified thread pitches from 80
to 10 threads per inch and 28 different metric pitches
from .25 to 2.0mm. You can also cut any of those as
right- or left-hand threads. Inch threads can be cut
on a metric machine and metric threads can be cut on

the new speed control unit also compensates for load,
keeping the RPM more constant during cuts.
Everyone see ms to be pretty impressed by how
powerful the motor actually is when they use it. The
electronically controlled speed range of 70 to 2800
RPM requires no changes of gears or belts to
achieve, you just turn the speed control knob for
any speed in that range. For example, half speed is
about 1400 RPM . (It is not necessary to know the
RPM exactly, because your initial approximate
speed setting will be adjusted by looking at the chips
and li stening to the cut as you become more
experienced. *) For even higher torque at low speeds
268

,"OtO· (HUClIIUIWOOO

140 separate chucks, collets and accessories made
by Sherline were available, and the number
continues to grow.

Q:

Do I have fo be an expert machinisf fo run
miniafure machine fools?

A:

The "coke bottle " casting ofthe steam engine shown
on the previous page is set up for boring. Note the
custom allachment fixture used to help hold the
casting. A steady rest supports the outer end.

an inch machine. The motor and speed control are
replaced with a series of interchangeable gears and
a hand crank wheel is used to advance the spindlel
leadscrew geartrain. This method gives you a good
feel for the cut and also allows you the advantage of
cutting right up to the shoulder of a bolt. Once you
can cut threads on a lathe, you'll never be limited to
threads available in standard tap and die sets again!

Q: Are accessories available fo do special iobs?

A: If you are thinking of buying a machine, this is

No. In fact, a good craftsman will often do
better than a professional machinist on small tools.
Machinists work all day with big machines that cost
thousands of dollars, and will often tend to push a
smaller machine too hard. It's sort of like a race car
driver going to the airport in a 4-cylinder rental
car ... he' ll have his foot to the floor the whole time
and wear the car out in a hurry!
What good craftsmen will find is a whole new world
in which to express their creativity. Things that were
impossible to do before become simple operations.
A good miniature machine tool should be designed
so that it can be operated by people with a good
"common sense" knowledge of mechanics. I feel
Sherline also provides the mo s t complete
instructions in the industry. With good tools, the
accessories you need, good instructions and a
willingness to take the time to make good parts, you
have everything you need to enjoy the world of
miniature machining.

Q:

If I don'f know anything abouf machining,
how can I learn whaf I need fo know fo gef
sfarted?

A:

an important question to ask. An off-brand or cheap
import ma y have an attractive price, but if
accessories aren' t available to fit it, you will have
trouble accomplishing some of the more
complicated tasks you may wish to attempt in the
future.

By the time you are done reading this book,
you will have all the knowledge you need to start
making parts on a lathe or mill. For those who want
to learn more, there are a couple of other good
sources. Earlier in the book, I mentioned that my
favorite source of information on machining is
Machinery 's Handbook. I provided some data on
this book which shows why I feel it is an important
resource for any machinist.
Other sources would be your local library or book
store's section on "machining", "metalworking" or
"technology". For those who may not have any
machinist friends but wish to converse with other
machinists to solve a particular problem or ask a
question, the Internet newsgroups are an excellent
source of information. Probably the most popular
with home machinists is "rec.crafts.metalworking",
although there are many groups tailored to specific
aspects of machining and modeling.

In the case of Sherline tools, the answer to this
question is "yes". Over the past two decades, new
accessories have been added each year to make this
the most complete line available from any single
machine tool manufacturer in the world, regardless
of size. Any machine shop job you might attempt
can be achieved in miniature on Sherline tools.
Accessories include attachments for thr.ead cutting,
knurling, indexing, boring and flycutting. Available
are a 4" rotary table, mill vise, power feed, wood
tool rests, and a large selection oo-and 4-jaw chucks
and tool posts. Sherline also make special tools for
watch and clock makers. In fact, at last count, over
270

Q: I have an alder lathe. III buy a new lathe
will myoId accessories still work?

A: Of course I can't speak for other manufacrurers,
but in the case of Sherline tools the answer is "yes".

Part of the design criteria for any change or
advancement made on Sherline tools is that they still

work with all the accessories that have been made
in the past. This also means that if you buy a used
Sherline tool from a friend, all the new accessories
will work on it, no matter when it was made. The
only exception wou ld be when an advancement
eliminates the need for a particular accessory, such

as the new DC motor's greater torque and speed
range e limin ating the need for the slow speed
attachment, or the new tailstock design eliminating
the need for a tail stock spindle extender.

Q: Will my machine tools become obsolete?

A: No. A good lathe from the 1950's is sti ll a good
lathe today, because the job of a lathe has never
changed. The key is to get good equipment to start
with. Sherline Products has been making tools since
1974, and all our accessories will still fit any of the
tools we have ever made. We plan to keep it that
way. The quality and versati lity of the machines will
continue to improve, but you never need worry that
the machine you buy today wi ll become outdated.
Look at the functiona lity of a good miniature
machine tool the way you might look at a pair of
high-quality needle-nose pliers. It does its job so
we ll , there is no need to redesign it, and it will sti ll
be manufactured 100 years from now.

Another view of the finished steam engine project
by Chuck Shenvood.

Two of the most recent winners
of the Joe Martin Foundation
award for outstanding
miniafllre craftsmanship are
clockmaker William R. "Bill"
Smith (2000) and designer and
builder of ultra-miniature
engines, George Luhrs (2001).
Mr. Smith and one ofhis clocks
are shown at the left and Mr.
Luhrs and his 4-cyJinder, 4cycle sparkplug fired airplane
engine are shown at the right.
The running engine has a bore
of just fl8 and a stroke of
5//6". See page 333 for more
on the Foundation.
H

271

Sherline's Australian roots
The early Model 1000 lathe as it was made in
Australia. The original design concept was so sound
that only minor changes have been made to improve
it throughout the past 25 years.

First Sherline Model 1000 lathe
originates "Down Under
"
The first Sherline Model 1000 lathe was originally
designed and built in Australia. Conceived by
designer Harold Clisby (see page 342), the original
design parameters included a rigid bed to avoid
twisting and a low manufacturing cost. These goals
were to be achieved through the clever use of
extruded parts. Mr. Clisby went on to tum his energy
to developing a line of air compressors, and a
Melbourne manufacturing engineer named Ron Sher

lOok the lath e concept to reality in 1972. Hi s
knowledge of electric mOlors was combined with

Mr. Clisby's design concept to produce the first lathe
and a small line of accessories.
_10: "01' O'tA'lWU"

In 1972, production oftheSherline Model 1000 lathe
began in the East Bentleigh, Victoria , Australia
plant of Ronald Sher Pty. Ltd.

m

Ron Sher produced the lathe in his 10,000 square
foot facility. The company was called Ronald Sher
Pty. Ltd., and Ron registered the trademark for the
Sherline nam e and the
business or trading name of
Sherline Products. Trained
as an electrical engineer with
a specialty in series motor
design for power tool s, his
design and marketing
experience had been gained
working with the fir st
Australian manufacturer of
power tool s, Sher Power
Tools, which was eventually Ron Sher was the coacquired by Ski) Corp. With designer and first
the assistance of the manufacturer of the
Australian Department of original Sherline
Overseas Trade (now lathe.
Austrade), Sherline Products
exhibited at various trade shows around the world
including the USA. The story that follows details
how Joe Martin learned of the line and contracted
with Ron Sher to sell lathes in the United States. A
commitment to se ll the machines through Sears
changed the direction of the company and brought
manufacturing to the United States. From a desire
to s imply distribute a product, Joe ended up
manufacturing tools which are now sold all over the
world. The tool and accessory line has grown to
become the largest and most complete of any
machine tool line in the world, regardless of the
physical size of the machines.

SECTION 4-- Other Machining Topiu

Chapter 5- Making a business out of a hobby
Where I'm coming from with this story

word " I." As I read and rewri te thi s s{Qry I can' t
seem to get rid of it. As I'm trying to expl ain the
problem I keep adding it I don't want to sound like
a bore at a coc ktail party, but every seOlence I try {Q
put together has the word " I" in it. In thinking about
the problem for a while I realized it was the result
of simply not having enough money. I'm not talking
about money for a better education where I might
have learned more about fancy word s and proper
writing. I'm referring to the money it takes to be
able to pay other people to solve problems and do
your work for you. I have always had to solve the
problems or make the decisions myself. Money to
spend on something I could do myself just wasn't
there, but I wouldn't have wanted it any other way.

I' ve always been a "builder." I can't remember a
time in my life when I sat around with nothing to do
and idle thoughts filling my mind. Whether it was
school or hobby or job, there was always anmher
technical problem to be solved. Building a business
was just like building the boat I built in high school
or my latest Sherline accessory. Each has consisted
of simply so lving a seri es of problems until the
project is complete, then on to the next. Writing this
book hasn' t been any different, and it has created

many new and interesting problems for me.
The main problem I' m having with thi s book is
similar to a design that starts out simply and then
too many nuts and bolts are used to add on more
pieces. This, in tum, makes the design a "loser." The
"nuts and bolts" I'm referring to in this story is the

You may also come to the conclusion that I spend
too much time on CNC machines. This isn't the case,
for if you wish to manufacture a product in the future,
these are the new workers for the manufacturin g
world. The managers who control these marvelous
machine s will becom e more import a nt to a
manufacturing company than the managers who
control your finances. These will be the machines
that will create the profit a company needs to survive.
Whether you build the product or "farm the work
out," in order to have competent suppliers you must
have a general knowledge of the systems available,
whatever your endeavors.

'lllflWJiflIllll.

!IJIll:i'JJIJliJ®

!ll!l~

A-.a6AI ...

Starting a business with little or no money
has its advantages
It may surprise you to learn that I believe starting a
business without any money can actually be easier
because you don't have anything to lose. A lot of
the pressure is taken away because the worst thing
that can happen to you is you may have to go back
to working fOf someone else again. Thi s is the logic
I used when I left my good job at Kraft Systems and
started out on my own again. I hope you may find a
use for the philosophy I used to Cfeat e Sherline
Products or at least find it interesting. There are still
thousands of products that haven' t come to market.
and the opportunity still exists to start out on your
own. However, please don ' t take on thi s challenge
if your success is going to be achieved at the expense
of someone else. There are enough "wheelers and
dealers" in this world. and we don' t need any more.

Joe Martin on the cover of a 1964 contest program
holding one of the many RIC models he has built.

m

Another shot of a very young Joe Marlin and his 8-47 model from about /964.
model aircraft in my spare time. (My full time job
was working at the building trades as an asbestos
worker.) I had been building model aircraft for some
time, and the radio control aspect of modeling
excited me to no end. The controls at that time were
still rather crude ; in fact, transistors hadn ' t been
invented yet, but having the ability to control a plane
and land it in the same field from which it took off
was like science fiction to me. My job in the building
trades required that I travel often, but I still managed
to get my models built by taking a week or so off at
the end of each job.

Making goad ded.ian.
My story may be useful to so meone with a fair
amount of ski ll and intelligence who is willing to
work hard, but not to a person who didn't take the
time to di scover how things work. Standing in front
of a mirror conv inc ing yourself that you "can and
will" just doesn't cut it in my world. "Feeling good
about yourself' doesn't result in success; it results
from success. Success comes from making good
deci sion s, and deci s ion s are simply educated
compromises. You can't make good decisions
without a great deal of knowledge about your
subject. Being a self-taught person, I probably suffer
from a bit of "tunnel vision," but I've knocked a lot
of meat off my knuckles working for other people.
I've been on both s ides of the fence , and the
conclusion I have arrived at is whatever side you're
on will be the most difficult. The fence is too high
to see the problems on the other side.

AU excuse" hobby
no
What was really interesting about the hobby to me
was that a good modeler could design. build and fly
his creation without help. If all three of these things
weren't done correctly the model aircraft would
crash. A good model may have had hundreds of hours
of labor and many dollars invested, which made the
first flight very exciting. Your money and prestige
were on the line when a model was released for its
maiden flight. A good flight was a win. Success or

GeHing an early start with radio control models
After graduating from Cranston High School in
Rhode Island in 1953, r started building radio control
274

failure wasn't a shared experience, and that 's the
way I liked it. To make it more interesting, you could
co mpete against one another at model aircraft
contests. It is as much of a sport as any ball game.
You are controlling an object that is trave ling at
speeds in excess of 100 miles per hour. The timing
has to be perfect to execute the maneuvers required.
Your aircraft has to be "set up" just like a racecar. It
is a very difficult hobby and sport because failures
are crashes. This teaches you the facts of life when
it comes to designing and building anything. Do it
wrong and you will crash. What a simple rule. You
can't make excuses because you did it all yourself.

Acraftsman is accountable for his work
Workers who build things understand this rule, for
if you tell a machinist to make a part, it has to be
right or he loses his respect as a craftsman. Compare
thi s to the job of a salesman. You sit down and start
negotiating on a new car. The salesman makes you
so mad you leave and go to another dealer. The
salesman screwed up everything so badly that his
dealer lost a good customer; however, the salesman
can tell everyone that the customer was an idiot who
didn' t understand automobiles. He has someone else
he can blame for hi s failures. There is no good way
to evaluate people in jobs like thi s. With a craftsman
it is simple: the part is either good or bad. I believe
thi s is why I have always preferred to have friends
who build things. They don 't have time to make
excuses. If they don ' t do it right they crash.

Being a business owner - my fourth best talent
Starting a business was a natural thing for me to do.
My modeling friends were starting all type s of
businesses to supply thi s new hobby. I will always
consider myself a modeler first, a product designer
seco nd , a machini st and toolmaker third and a
businessman fourth. Being a business owner is easier
if you can do everything yourself as I can, especially
when it comes to the tooling. The spec ialized tooling
it takes to manufacture a product at a reasonable
cost can be very expensive. I paid for it by working
an extraordinary number of hours. Don 't think for a
moment that I was smarter and learning is easier for
me than other peo pl e. The difference is I'm
persistent. I can remember screwing up a part on a
Sunday night after working all weekend on it, going
home and catching a little sleep and starting over by
six Monday morning. There are very few projects I
seriously started on and didn ' t finish. People who
don 't finish projects on their own shouldn ' t start a

business unless they have enough money to pay other
people to fini sh what they start. I don't spend much
time looking back unless it is for information I can
use in a positive way.
The secret to success when it comes to working with
people is simply that ; you work with your employees
more than you have your employees work for you.
All you have to be is fair and accept their mi stakes
as you would accept your own errors. As your
c ompan y grows yo ur own e rror s will grow
exponentially. The reason for thi s is that your
deci sions are onl y the "tough ones." Your managers
will make the easy dec isions. You get stuck with
the "damned if you do and damned if you don't"
type. One of the hardest deci sions to make is when
to let someone else make a decision. You hear all
thi s crap about micro-managing. Th ese can be
buzzwo rd s for people spendin g other peopl e's
money, but when you're spending your own money
and you don ' t have much to spend, it takes a lot of
guts to tum your back on anything that could speed
you on your way to the poorhouse.
I have a couple of rules at my company that have
worked quite well over the years. One is: "You can't
tell a worker how to do a job unless you can do that
job yourse lf." I don't mind manageme nt people
telling workers how many parts (0 make or when to
make the parts. They can suggest a new method,
but the craftsman who does thi s work has the final
say unless that manager can show him how to do it
better, not just tell him. Another rule I would like to
slip in is " If you hired an employee, you fire them if
they don 't work out." My managers can't leave this
nasty task to anyone but themselves. It has to go
with the territory they control. Managers who can
make this decision too easily are not much better
than the ones that can' t make it at aiL If a company
wants employees who "care," a company has to care
for employees in a like fashion. Employees have to
believe they are more than a machine that run s eight
hours a day. Many managers have never learned thi s
because they have never worked at ajob where their
performance was easy to check. Hav ing a recent
engineering graduate with a stopwatch stand behind
a worker with twenty years of experience isn' t a good
way to build unity in a company.
It isn't hard to be a hero in today's business world
where BS is king. We just treat customers the way
we want a business to treat us. A recommendation
from a sati sfied customer carries far more weight to
275

Joe's first experience with miniature machine toots was in building these custom joysticks designed for
NASA to help learn how to land the lunar module.
a potential buyer than what could be said in an
advertisement. By the same token, a bad word from
an unhappy customer can cost you sales. They say a
happy customer tell s ten other people, but an
unhappy customer tells a hundred. Some of our most
devoted and loyal customers are not the ones who
have never had a problem, but rather ones who have
had a problem and had it taken care of promptly
and politely. Unfortunately. in today 's business
climate, good service is becoming more of a rarity ,
and it is a relatively easy place to stand out from the
rest.
Afirst experience with miniature machine tools
My interest in miniature machine tools started while
working for a company called Micro Avionics, which
manufactured control systems for model aircraft in
the late sixties. At that time we were using better
control systems for model aircraft than the military
had deve loped for their own use. I was asked to
extensively modify a couple of model airplane
joysticks to control a model of the moon lander being

developed by NASA. To simulate weightlessness
in space they flew a large transport aircraft in a
trajectory that temporarily eliminated gravity. For a
few minutes at a time they would try to control this
contraption with jet nozzles in zero gravity. Micro
Avionics had taken the contract for the control
electronics without giving much thought to the
switches that would control the device. When we
found out what they really wanted for joysticks we
were in big trouble because we didn't have time to
contract out the machining . I worked with
mechanical devices at the company so it was my
"baby." All we had for tool s was an old drill press.
Fortunately for me, one of my modeling buddies,
Carl Hammons. who would later become my partner,
had an old Unimat lathe and let me use it for a few
weeks. These miniature lathes came out around 1955
and sold for $99. They were packaged in a nice
wooden box and became an immediate hit. They
sold thousands. The only machining experience I
had prior to that was one year of metal shop in
Z/6

school, but I was a modeler. A good modeler can
accomplish what needs to be done with what he has
at hand. Modelers have developed this trait by simply
not having enough money to do it any other way.
The Unimat wasn't rigid, making it difficult to hold
tight tolerances, but it was a lifesaver to me and I
got the job done on time.

knew how to build their connectors. He offered me
an opportunity to start my own bu si ness to supply
them. I rented a 1500 sq uare foot shop in a n
indu strial area in Upland, California and I was in
business.
I didn ' t need many tools to produce these connectors,
and I got started using the modeling tool s I had at
home. Summer came and I found out how hot a small
shop could get. At that time my idea of a successful
business was one that could afford air conditioning.
I would work long into the night building tooling
when it was cool, for I had to build connectors during
the day to pay the rent.

Don Mathes, the owner of Micro Avionics was
typical of some of the real clever designers I met in
my life. He drank way too much. I ' ll never
understand why this talented group can find so much
happiness in a boule. Don was supposed to do the
electronics on this project and he went on a drunk.
With only two weeks to go, he showed up one
morning looking like death warmed over. He was
shaking so bad that if he were standing on the beach
he would have disappeared into the sand. By four in
the afternoon Don again took on the appearance of
a human. He worked all night and laid out a circuit
board with black tape at a scale of four to one. He
skipped the component layout completely and laid
out a board that had over a hundred components in
a very short period of time . This was long before
computer programs and multilayer boards. It was a
work of art with the components spiraling towards
center; in fact, it was so good it appeared on the
cover of an electronics magazine. As soon as it was
checked out, Don was off again to complete the
drunk he started. He came back a couple of weeks
later looking good and never mentioning where he
had been. Don died long before he should have.

In reality, I was just assembling connectors. The
existing design was somewhat of a compromise, and
I wanted to redes ign them and make them properl y.
Most radio control manufactures at the time were
using a connector manufactured in Mexico. Because
of the low labor rates in Mexico I had to come up
with a way to match thei r prices and at the sa me
time make it small and easy to use. It would have to
be injection molded from plastic. A local mold maker
gave me a pri ce. To build a mold for our product
would cost over ten thousand dollars! This is where
my career with machin e tool s reall y starts. We
bought an old mill and a lathe from a company that

With a partner, I start my first business
My next proj ec t in machinin g came when Carl
Hammons and I started a business to manufacture
connectors for the radio control industry. Micro
Avionics decided they could get along without me
because I found it impossible to get along with the
owner's girl fri end . She had the ability to destroy
perfectly good parts faster than we could make them.
The straw that broke the camel's back was when
she and her girlfriends were assembling servos and
a gear shaft had a burr on it She decided to use a
hammer to force the shaft into a plastic gear less
than a penny in size. After I showed her how to
deburr the shaft and assemble the gear train properly,
she reverted back to her hammer and destroyed two
trays of parts worth $500.00. I blew my top and got
fired. Don and I stiB remained good friends because
I knew he was between the old "rock and a hard
place." He soon realized I was the only one who

Joe wilh machinist and longtime friend Benny
Taguchi examine a molded part at Kraft Systems.

m

Minor irritations in working with hand~me-down tools

wasn' t using them any more. I was informed that
these were the tools that had been used to start their
business. These machines had a sentimental value
to the owners, and they sold them to me at a very
reaso nabl e pri ce . I be lieve they were thinkin g,
" Maybe these tool s can start one more bu sine ss
before they end up in a junkyard." We rescued them
along with an old four~ ounce Van Dorn injectionmolding machine that Micro Avionics didn ' t need
anymore after firing me.

The milling machine we purchased would "drive
me up a wall" when I started building tooling for
plastic molds. The handwheel for the table turned
in the opposite direction from the way it should.
Nonnally, if you tum a handwheel clockwise on any
machine tool, the slide will move away from you.
This may seem simple, but when you have a cutter
in a mold cav ity that you have been working on for
a week, you take the chance of ruining it by turning
the handwheel in the wrong direction. Ju st thinking
about it would make me break out in a cold sweat.
Also, if you allow a cutter to run in a corner too
long it may chatter and undercut the cav ity. Thi s
wouldn't ruin the job, but it could take countless
hours to get rid of the flaw with polishing stones.
This backwards handwhee1 never came naturally to
me, and it was like trying to drive a car thal had the
steering reversed.

If you can't afford to hire a toolmaker, become one
There was a mold maker in the area who suggested
that I should attempt to build the mold my self. He
gave me a general idea of how a plastic mold was
made and where to buy components, and I was in
the mold making business. Getting me pointed in
the right direction at the start was my friend's real
contribution, and it would be hard to evaluate how
much time he saved me. I have always found if you
need he lp on a project don't ask for too much. I
started on the project and didn't ask for help until I
really needed it. I read what I could on the subject,
but my friend saved me from a many time consuming
errors. I consider it an accomplishment that we were
even better friends after the mold was completed.
You shouldn 't attempt to have your teachers do your
work, because at that point you start usi ng them.
Who wants to help a lazy person?

A few doors away from my shop there was a machine
shop that allowed me to use a surface grinder to put
the finishing touches on my mold . Each time I used
it J would clean the grinder up to s how m y
appreciation. Since then , I have he lped seve ral
peopl e in the same way and le t them use the
equipment in my shop when they were in a bind;
however, I neve r see m to find my mac hin e any
cleaner when they are done.

Produdion machinist vs. toolmaker

It took about three months to complete my connector
mold, and I was quite proud of it. It was what is
called a " family" mold, which mean s a complete
group of parts is produced at every cycle. When the
mold closed, 180 pins had to mate with the opposite
side , and the diameter of many of these pin s was
only 1132" (O.8mm). Now I had to teach myself how
to operate an injection molder. The injection molder
we purchased was old, and old machines had a
plunger-type injection system which left much to
be desired and didn't have any instructions; however,
I didn ' t know enough about it to realize how much
of a problem they could be. Setting up this machine
was a big deal for me because it was my first
experience with an automatic piece of equipment.
This fasc inated me because it could be doing work
without me standing over it. It took about four hours
to get a good "shot ," and soon the machine was
producing good parts at a rate of 90 cycles per hour.
I sat in the office with a big smile on my face
li stening to the old molding machine make good
parts. You would think that now, after thirty years

Another point that should be di scussed is the notion
that a production machini st doesn't have to be as
skilled as a toolmaker. These were my thoughts until
I went from building plastic molds to setting up
production equipment. I didn' t have a clue as to how
little I knew about the process of cutting metal. When
building tooling, I would put a little cutting oil on
the work and control speed and feed by the amount
of smoke I was generating. You have to know more
than that to cut metal in a production environment.
Feeds and speeds are controlled by gears, cams and
computers that don't allow for errors. If you are
drilling one hole in a piece of tooling it doesn't make
much difference whether it takes one minute or two,
but if you have 10,000 holes to drill , that difference
will cost 10,000 more minutes, which is an extra
167 hours of machine time. When you consider that
most CNC machines cost over $60 an hour (a dollar
a minute) to operate, that extra minute you wasted
drilling a hole comes out to $10,(X)() lost.

278

of owning and operating automatic machines, they
would have lost their fascination to me, but they
haven' t.
The contacts for the connector would have to be
made on a Swiss type screw machine. It is a specialty
type machine, and I didn ' t have the skill or the time
to produce these parts myself. It was by chance that
I contacted a company called Screwamatic, which
was li sted in the Yellow Pages. I could never have
found a better source. The Yellow Pages have been
very useful over the years, and it is where I usually
start looking for something new. The next choice at
that time was the Thoma s Register, whic h is a
collection of books that li sts manufacturers of most
eve rything. Today I use the World Wide Web or the
Internet to help locate new sources, but sometimes I
still sta rt w ith the telephone directory. Many
companies will refer you to another if they can' t help
you. We started with orders for 25,000 pin s and
worked our way up to orderi ng a million pins at a
time . Their quality was 100% and it in spired me to
improve every project I have worked on since then.
Eac h new tool I acquired was treated like a treasure
in my shop. They were always used and somewhat
worn OU I, but I could usually find a way to get them
running and put them to good use. I soon had enough
lool s and skill to build simple plastic molds and did
a small amount of contract work. How I wished I
could have afforded the time to work for a mold
shop for a couple have years where I could have
properly learned the mold making trade. I really liked
that type of work. I found it exc iting to test a new
mold I built and see if I didn ' t make any errors.
Looking back at it I ofte n wondered whether I would
have been better off buying one new machine rather
than buyin g several used machines. I cou ld have
co ntracted o ut th e work th at required th ese
spec ia li zed machines and conce ntrated on onl y
doing basic machining. In some cases learn ing to
operate some of these speci ali zed machines was, in
fact, learning a new trade. As I think about it, the
main thing I learned was how to teach myself how
to do different things wi tho ut a teacher. On the other
hand, each time I contracted out work, I would end
up with problems with their deli very dates or price.
At least I had control over myoid equipment, and I
found it less frust rating to fix a machine than argue
with a supplier.
Our next proj ect was a servo for RC aircraft. At that
time. it was to be the smallest servo on the market.

Th e Allstralian facIO I)! of Ron Slier Pty. Ltd. where
the first Sherlille machines were prodllced. Loose
productioll tolerallces of the early machines cal/sed
assembly to be a time conslIming "mix alld match"
process.
Injection plastic molds were a lot harder to build at
that tim e becau se EDM mac hin es (e lectrical
di sc harge machine) were not avai lable to small
shops. To build a new mold and keep the doors open
at the same time with on ly two employees took great
effort on my part. It could take over 500 hours to
build the mold. I usuall y worked on it when I was
alone after hours. Twel ve-hour. seven-day weeks
were normal. A vacation was going to Los Angeles
to a machine tool auction.

Kraft Systems takes control of my company
We started sell ing our connectors, but we weren ' t
surviv in g financially. Carl, my partner, was still
working at General Dynamics as an engineer, and
the bu siness was more of a hobby to him . Carl might
come up with a few hundred dollars to buy an
interesting machi ne, but when it was necessary to
pay the thousand dollars of bills for rent, labor and
supplies, he wasn' t interested. I would have to go
withou t a paycheck. Phil Kraft, owner of Kraft
Systems Inc., offered to buy me out and start another
company to manufacture our connectors for hi s
company. We wo uld al so supply connec tors to
" Heath Kit" for their radio control kits. I would be a
25% owner and Carl would be a 10% owner of thi s
new corporation that wou ld be called Muhicon Corp.
At this ti me, Kraft Systems was rapidly becoming
the largest manufacturer of rad io control products
in the world.
279

This YAG laser gives Sherline the capability to
engrave its own parts in-house. Doing as many jobs
as possible ill -house 1I0t only helps you comrol your
OWIl schedule and costs, it also gives you all excuse
to buy more lIeat machines. If you look closely, the
small bright spot of light ill the green window on
lhe door to the laser enclosure is the poim of the
laser beam actually burning numbers into a part.
My job would be to integrate our connectors into their
products and develop products for the model aircraft
industry. The servo Carl and I developed would be
turned over to another divi sion. I wasn't too happy
about thi s arrangement but realized it could create
problems if I marketed it. We had hundreds of hours of
labor and design in this project and were only paid for
the outside cost we had spent. Unfortunately I wasn't
in a position to argue thi s point. Kraft Systems sold
over one hundred thousand of these servos, and it
pleased me that our design was accepted, but the fact
that Carl and I never made a penny on it always bothered

me.
Kraft Systems was profitabl e and could afford to
pursue new ideas. A divi sion was also formed to
manufacture a model aircraft engine. I sat in on an
early meeting to discuss this project and lost faith
in its success when we were told to the penny what
it would take to build an e ng ine. It would be
impossible to predict costs this accurately, and I don ' t
trust people that BS me. RogerThibal proved me wrong
about having the skill to build an engine but also proved
I was right when it came to anticipating cost, which was
offby 100%. We beat our brains out trying to build an
engine that could be sold at a retail cost of under
$ 100.00. The biggest error we made was not realizing
how much the future modelers would pay for a good
product. We should have been trying to build a $300.00
engine that was reall y better than any model eng ine
currently on the market.

Phil Kraft, the sole owner of Kraft Systems Inc., was
an interesting person to be around because of his many
interests. He started in business by designing a small,
single-channel radio control receiver that would fit into
the plastic case that nickel cadmium batteries were sold
in at that time. Transistors and nickel cadmium were
new to the market at that time, and modelers were
putting both to good use. Phil even put the box to good
use. It was one of the few receivers that actually worked,
and it gave Phil a good name in this new industry. It
wasn't long before Kraft Systems was a leader in
producing new radio control equipment. A spin-off
business that became successful was manufacturing
the joysticks we used to control our models. One of
our fi rst customers for joysticks was a manufacturer
of electric wheelchairs. Then, the computer people
found a use for joysticks when computer games started
to become popular and sales took off. They became

the major part of sales for Kraft Systems after Phil left
his company.
The fact that Phil was a serious contender at any
RIC contest and even won the world championship
was of great value. I remember a photo session taken
outside of the Kraft building in Vi sta where all the
modelers (aircraft) who worked for Phil Kraft lined
up with the trophies they had won on the ground in
front of them. This picture wasn' t rigged, and we
had so many trophies on the ground we couldn't put
them all in the picture. How I wish I could have had
the advantage of all this input into my own company.
In thirty years of bu sin ess I've only had two
employees take an interest in hobbies that would
use the equipment we manufacture. The reason could
be that it isn 't a diversion for people who work with
machine tools for a li ving. Never pass up a potential
employee who takes an interest in the products you
manufacture.
Phil was also buying expensive sports cars and
aerobatic aircraft at the same time. I' m sure you have
heard the expression "He who dies with the most
toys wins." Phil was and still is a serious contender
in this event.

Valuable lessons leorned
I was becoming a mold maker who could make
molds for my own products but was not really good
enough to make molds for industrial customers. Thi s
didn't particularly bother me, because I wanted only
to make molds for my own products. not do contract
work. I made severa l other products, such as a
joystick and a retractable landing system for the

RIC industry at Kraft Systems. I learned a lot while
doing it. Phil wanted me to de velop a ready-to-fly
RIC aircraft, and I was working diligentl y on the
project until he told me he wanted a retail selling
price under $ 100 with a 45 % discount to dealers. It
became an impossible mi ss ion because I had over
$30 in outside cost. It wouldn't be worth the effort
financially because it left only $25 to build, package,
advertise and sell it. I couldn't work on the project
without an attainable goal and wanted out.

thinking of the days, weeks or year's task to perform
at my job. Suddenly the interest was gone. It was as
if someone flushed all the problems from my mind .
I slept like a baby even though I wasn't sure where
I was headed. It was obvious that thi s was a good
decision for me.
My friends and family thought it was a very bad
decision and wasted a lot of time trying to talk me
out of it. I didn't get any help from any of the contacts
I made whil e I was at Kraft Systems but I didn't
expect any . My biggest loss was not having the time
to be a real modeler anymore and drifting away from
my modeling friends.

All and all, I learned about good design, tooling,
packaging, advertising and th e value of good
instructions while there. All of what I learned would
come in handy later. As I look back at my stay at
Kraft Systems it was good for me, and I believe it
was good for Kraft Systems as welL

The next venlure: a greal hobby knife Ihal didn'lsell
I took the mon ey from my portion of the sa le,
$40,000 after taxes, and started another company.
Carl, myoid partner and friend stayed at Kraft while
I started Martin Enterprises. I contacted Ron Sher,
the manufacturer of the Sherline lathe in Australi a,
and told him that I had left Kraft and was interested
in marketing his products in the United States. Ron
needed someone to represent him in this country and,
at that time, I don' t believe he had too many cho
We agreed to take this to the next level, and l ord
a few machines to start the venture.

My first look 01 a Sherline lalhe
Kraft Systems owned part of a company in Australia
that assembled and distributed Kraft products in the
South Pacific. They sent us a Sherline lathe, which
was built in Au stralia, for evaluation. It was of
interested to me because of the experience I had with
the Unimat working on the NASA project. The
Sherline design was far more ri gid and had some
other features that were superior to the Unimat. My
love of tool s told me there was a market for a small
lathe such as this. At about the same time Phil Kraft
decided to sell Kraft Systems Inc. to Carli sle Corp.
There wasn't any interest in the Sherline lathe at
Kraft because radio control and joystick sales were
growing rapidly , and with the new owners taking
over, the lathe was forgotten by everyone but me.

.. ....
--

NEW -

",0, _

BLADE HOLDER

I stayed on at Kraft for a year or so but the interest
in the job I had before the sale just wasn't there any
more. This fact was brought to my attention when
another partner, Chuck Hayes, asked me durin g a
conversation at lunch, " If you're so dammed smart,
why in the hell are you working here?" I thought
about that for about five minutes and gave my twoweek notice that afternoon. I was a person who
needed to have more control than I could have while
working for someone else. It was very difficult to
work on a project I didn't believe in , and I wanted
to make my own way. Chuck only brought this fact
to the surface, and I didn ' t leave because I didn 't
like the people I was working with.
Once I had made up my mind to leave I was
fascinated by how fa st I lost all interest in the
company. Until then, I would wake up in the morning

,

DESIGNE D FOR POPutAR BlADES
•

......... DI_L ...... ......... . - ..
..... ..... rrLO< . ."

· .......,"' ..... .....,.,. ...
...........,,---_.-•

............... _

..... LOCOOIOO 00 LOON .....

.......... u.-.. ............ fUlIN

• ..omo ... oe~ .......... _

IoIARTIN EHlUI1'1!I$(S • P.O. OOX..o7 • UN

...........

~

CA. a:lOO8

A catalog sheet for the £'Z'Loc kllife .. .a "b,
moustrap" that had no one beating a path to the Ct. ..........
28 1

I had lots of time while waiting for the first machines
and started thinking about a new product I could
make. I wasn't lacking ideas, but the product had to
be one that could be produced with limited funds.
The first product I chose was a hobby knife that
locked from the back end. I had used tool s like this
for years, and what I disliked about them was the
blade would come loose if you turned the handle
counterclockwise when the blade was taking a heavy
cut. I had given my self a nasty cut because of thi s
flaw, so I designed one that would eliminate this
defect and use the standard blades available. I had a
screw machine shop make me the parts for two sizes.
I didn't know enough about manufacturing at the time
and added too many costs to the product with my
inexperience. It ne ver sold well enough to make it
worth the effort. The money to be made on products
of this type has to made producing the components
or purchasing them in such large quantities that a
reasonable retail price is attainable.
From this venture I learned that if you build a better
product, the world would not beat a path to your door
unless a distributor can make more money on your
product than he is presently making on the similar
product he is now marketing. The first question
usuall y asked by distributors was, " What' s the
di scount ?" If they didn ' t like the di scount they
wouldn't even li sten to your sales pitch. It makes
more se n se to me now that I realize sa le s
organizations are more intere sted in selling the
products they already have on the shelves than they
are in selling yours. They will stock something new

only when they are forced to by consumer demand.
I also learned that if you advertise your product and
it isn't on the shelves in the appropriate retail
market, you might end up selling your competitor's
product. The storekeeper is going to try to sell what
is on his shelves first. In other words, if a Sherline
ad inspires you to purchase a lathe and you go to
your local hobby shop where they have an old
Unimat on the shelves, that is what they will try to

sell you.
Australian T Office gets help in conlrad with Sears
rade
Before Ron Sher and I had any agreement, the
Australian Consulate in Chicago had Sears
interested in selling the Sherline lathe, and for Sears
to sell the lathes they needed to deal with a U.S.
representative. We met in Chicago at the Sears
Tower. A representative from the local Australian
trade office had arranged the meeting. A
representative of Sherline Australia, a buyer for
Sears and I were there. We all knew what the other
party was going to pay for the product and charge
for the product as it passed through our companies.
It still took another trip to Chicago to get the order.
The buyer was very apologetic and informed me
the sample machine we had sent them was stolen.
Jokingly I told him that our product was so good
people will steal it if they can't buy it. Actually I
was glad it was missing, because I never had a
chance to go through it, and from what I had seen
of the quality so far, I was worried. Sears gave us
an order to produce the lathe with a "Craftsman"
label, but I'll always wonder if we got that order
out of sympathy because they lost our machine. I
was in business again. The main problem for my
family and I was eating regularly until these orders
materialized.

An expensive first fifty machines
It was never my intention to manufacture thi s
product. I only wanted to import and service the
machines and possibly make a few accessories for
it. The first fifty machines were supposed to have
been air freighted in time for an upcoming trade
show in Toledo, Ohio. They didn't make it in time
for the show, but I still sold around twenty machines.
At the time, air cargo rates to the South Pacific were
very expensive, about $30 for each lathe. The
shipment to me was late, so they were delivered to
the customers by UPS air to keep them happy. Now
I had $50 in each machine just in shipping. The
machines were also sold at a very reasonable price

Here s a project that was made strictly jar JUII, 1I0t
Junction. This cube witliill a cube within a cube is an
interesting cOl/versatioll piece. Made Jrom one solid
piece, the cubes will not fit through the holes. How
would you make it? This very small example was
made by Dick Saunders.
282

Problems with the Sears contract
shifts production to the USA

to get the product introduced. It worked out that $40
per machine was lost even if overhead and my labor
weren ' t included. In addition, the quality of the
product as it came from Australia just wasn't good
enough for the American market, and I had to rework
the machine s by matc hin g parts and had to
cannibalize several machines for parts. Not too good
a way to start a new business.

My name was on the contract with Sears, and I knew
I was in trouble if I couldn 't get the quality improved.
The amount of profit I would receive from a sale
wo uldn ' t allow me to spend time reworking th e
mac hin es. Before goin g on with this ve nture I
decided to visit Ron in Australia. It is important to
realize that by this time I was running out of money
at an alarming rate. The visit with Ron Sher and hi s
staff gave me more confidence in his organi zation .
I believed we solved a couple of technical problems
and I returned home . I had about four months to get
ready for my first shipments to Sears when I got a
telegram from Australia. I can still remember it as if
it were yesterday. It said , " Dea r Joe, los in g our
bloody ass down here. As of today the products will
cost $_ _ ." The problem was the new cost to me
would amount to a $50 loss on each machine Sears
would bu y even if I didn ' t have to do any work on
the m. Ro n wasn't totally to blame because things
were changing rapidly in Australia, and he was a
victim of circumstances. However, it was my name
on the contract with Sears. In reality, I didn ' t have
anything to lose because I was flat broke, but I'd be
dammed if I would fail and not live up to what I
agreed to. Ron agreed to help me set up production
of the Sherline lathe in the USA. I had a Bridgeport
mill and an old lathe in my garage and I started
making parts. Sherline Australia would send me the
parts I couldn ' t manufacture such as the die-castings.
They were very helpful , and I wiJI always apprec iate
how Ron Sher and hi s staff handled thi s matter. I
found a motor in the Grainger catalog that I could
purchase in production quantities and built a simple
speed control. Sherline lathes were now " Made in
the USA."

On the other hand, there are few products that can
be manufactured and be finan ciall y successful on
the fir st go-around. The profit in manufacturing
comes from low manufacturing cost, and this isn't
possible at the introduction of a new product. There
are only two ways (0 lower production cost. You
have a choice of higher quantities or bener "tooling".
Consider another advantage of CNC machines that
lowers nonrefundabl e tooling cost. The machines
may seem expensive, but these machines also hold
their value. Compare that with a spec ial machine
designed to produce a special part that may take a
year to be built and cost more than a standard CNC
machine. You ' ll be lucky to get one cent on the dollar
for it if your product bombs out. I would never
recommend going for higher quantities as you could
end up without any money and with a lot of product
that was worthless if it didn ' t sell. It would be better
to take a loss as I did on the first machines to see if
the product will sell than to have thousands of dollars
in parts left over. Pri ce the product so it refl ects a
price that could be charged if it becomes successful.

Bigger holes won't solve the problem
The biggest problem I had with the quality of the
Australian-made machines was sloppy tolerances.
A good exa mpl e to ex plain thi s type of problem
would be two holes drilled and tapped in a plate.
Now you have second plate you want to bolt onto
that plate using the tapped holes. You go to assemble
the two plates and the holes don't quite line up. Now
you have two choices; either start over with tighter
tol e rances or drill large r clearance hol es in the
second plate. If you are dealing with production parts
and you make a choice to drill bigger holes you will
find out why Henry Ford succeeded when others
failed. It beco me s impo ss ible to profitably
manufacture a product that doesn' t have tight enough
tolerances. When the tolerances get sloppy it takes
your best and highest paid employees to assemble
that product, because they have to " mix and match"
parts. Never get into the habit of drilling larger holes.

It's IImake it or break it" time
I was on my own and had to do it all myse lf. The
first major change I made was to grind the lathe bed.
I found an old surface grinder for a $ 1000, repaired
it and put it to work. The imported machine used an
extruded bra ss bed that wasn't very strai g ht.
Extrusion s are not perfectly stra ig ht and ha ve
tolerances that allow 0.0 10° twist per foot. This was
unacceptable for any machine tool. The twist and
"I am a great believer in luck, and lfind the
harder I work the more J have ofil."
- Thomas Jeffer son
283

size variation would al so cause too many assembly
problems, but what was more important was the fact
that American customers wouldn ' t accept a metal
lathe that wasn't accurate.
I wasn't even sure 1could grind brass. I built a couple
of fixtures to hold the bed, but my first attempt was
a disaster because the grinding wheel loaded up so
fast. I thought I had taken on an impossible task.l
added coolant and changed coolant but still no
success. What eventually made it work was a new
type of grinding wheel that had just become available
that was very porous. This worked like a charm, and
we only had to "dress" the wheel a couple times a
day. Grinding the bed turned out to be the most
expensive machine operation in building the lathe
then and now , but it was necessary. A tool has to
perform the work it was intended to do no matter
how low the selling price.
An interesting problem arose later over the angle I
chose to grind the bed dovetail. When I built the
tooling to hold the bed for grinding, I simply copied
the existin g angle using an indicator so it would
match th e assoc iated parts. 1 never accurately
checked the actual angle. I wished at that time that
it were a standard dovetail angle because I wouldn ' t
have to make special cutters that we matched to a
gage. I later measured the angle and it turned out to
be 55.5°. Twenty years later I was accused of using
that angle because it couldn ' t be easily copied. When
I found it being discussed on the Internet and few
believed me I began to understand how politicians
feel when these complex conspiracy theories are laid
in their laps.
At the same time I was looking for and found an
extrusion company to produce the basic lathe parts
needed. There wasn' t any other way to produce the
machine at a reasonable cost. Customers sometime
believe that we could produce a machine with heattreated and ground steel slides for just a few dollars
more. The truth is, it could easily cost twenty times
more. I believe the choices we have made give the
customer the most "bang for the buck."
The method Sherline Australia was using for a gib
(the adju stabl e piece used to re move "slop" in
machine dovetails) was unsatisfactory. It was hard
to adjust and keep in adjustment because of the
setscrews used. I had to come up with something
different. I just couldn ' t stop and wait until I came
up with a better idea. We had to go full speed ahead
on all the parts that I knew how to make. The design

for a gib I preferred was used on many machine tool s.
The gib was a wedge shaped piece adjusted from
the end; however, a corresponding angle had to be
machined in one section of the dovetail. A gib of
thi s type would be difficult and time consuming to
produce. It was on a Thursday when I realized that I
could build a si mple injection mold to produce this
part. I immediately set to work and had the mold
completed by Sunday night. A friend allowed me to
run a batch of parts on hi s injection -molding
machine to help me get started , and I had another
major problem solved in an inexpensive manner.
Building the first machines wasn't that hard unless
you wanted to make a profit. The parts are relatively
easy to make, and having machines on the shel ves
was my only interest. The main effort had to be
getting production machines running if we were
going to la st beyond our first shipment. CNC
machines were not availab le, and it took many
operation s to produce some parts. Each operation
would increase the chances for errors. "Scrap" was
a word that took on a new meaning. We had to walk
a very narrow line. If we scrapped out every part
that wasn't perfect we couldn't ship anything. If we
used every part that wasn't perfect, we would
produce junk. My job became very difficult. I started
to learn about the tolerances we could manufacture
parts to as well as the tolerances the product needed
to work properly. This was a lot more difficult than
one would think, and many hours were spent
reworking parts. The main problem then and now is
we are trying to hold tighter tolerances than the
process allows. Success ful companies a ll work
within these constraints. If it were easy, everyone
would do it.

Dealing with Sears
The buyer from Sears, who later went on to become
marketing director for my main competitor Unimat,
encouraged me and was amazingly understanding
of my plight. In later years, I enjoyed seeing him at
trade shows and never felt as if I were betrayed. It
was just bu s iness. The spac e allowed for my
products in the Sears catalog kept getting smaller
and our sa les dropped proportionally. Sears
eventually dropped our product line, and their new
policy was to sell only the most popular items. Every
similar company took the same approach and they
all started selling the same products. Th is has hurt
Sears because successful merchants meet the needs
of all their customers, not just most of them. Just

,.._ _• _ 'D'~'.' "':0'.
_ IIlI

think where Sears could have been today if they had
" hung in th e re " with their c atal og sa les and
complemented them with Internet marketing.
Sears is actually a very nice company to deal with if
you produce a product their customers like. I'm sure
you have heard the same horror stories I heard when
people found I was going to se ll to Sears. "They
will take you over after they order more parts than
you can produce." This was not the case, and I have
nothing but good things to say about Sears even
though they no longer sell our products.
On the other hand , losin g Sears as a distributor
wasn't as important to me as you may think, because
I had several ways to market the product other than
Sears. I always make sure I don't have "all my eggs
in one basket." Sears was always asking for special
reports and could be a pai n at times. If you sold 10
or 10,000 you still had to abide by the same rul es.
One time when I went to Chicago for a meeting, the
buyer didn't have any interest or know ledge in tools.
She should have been buying fur coats not power
tools. I always had the feeling that a hom could blow
at any time during the day and all the buyers could
ha ve moved to a different office, like a game of
"mu sica l chairs," and picked up the co nversation

Wh en the Department of Engineering at Texas
Christian University in Fl. Worth, Texas decided that
students and teachers needed to get some "hands~
on" experience to better understand the machining
process as it relates to manufacturing engineering,
they chose Sherline tools for their shop. They also
use the tools to teach an " Introdu c ti on to
Fabrication" course to high school students.
without missing a word . What really impressed me
at the Sears Tower was a gold plated radial ann saw
in the office. It was the one millionth manufactured.
Think about the warehouse area that it takes to store
products used in these incredible amounts.

An American company's place in the world market

-

ISears I
D",H",

M.ltll.'

,

,'..!d.:J.. ~
'1 ' -:l' ~~
~
___ -:.J

' \ - • ,;

MOOEl NO ,

527.2142
I

I
,
,

American manufacturers are at a disadvantage when
it comes to selling throughout the rest of the world.
The U.s . market is the largest market in the world,
and we now have a great di stribution method to get
products to the consumer with very little markup .
The di scount chain stores have such a large buying
power it allows them to dea l direct ly with
manufacturers throughout the world. Products are
shipped direc tl y to their warehouses with no
middl e man ma rkup s. This is a great deal for
consumers, but it makes for tough competition for
an American manufacturer.

CRAFTSMAN

This di stribution sys tem isn' t available to an
American manufacturer wishing to sell a product
outside the United States. Outside the U.S., a broker
may import a product and sell it to a distributor who
se lls it to retail stores, and finally it is sold to the
consumer. The problem is that everyone wants to
make 40% when they handle it. A U.S. product gets
marked up so many times that it is no longer a good
buy, but it isn' t the fault ofthe manufacturer. Import
duty also can add to the cost of the product. I have
had complaints from Japan , for exampl e, where
someone thinks our $ 1500 lathe should be more

3" METAL LATHE
CAUTION'

I S.,.
I carefully

Read Ruin Illr
Operation
and Instructions
'!MS. IIOlIUa

• Assembly

.Operation

.Installa!illn
.Repair Parts

... D aI. Clot .... . . 1OU4.

u. .
u

"fhi> {,igll stcllldlirds requ ired by Sears ill Iheir
instruction manuals established a precedent for all
Sherline instructions which would follow.
285

A complete accessory lille wkes a long time to design alld produce, but it is one of the things that gives a
prospective buyer confidence in the basic product. No mailer what you may want to allempt with your
machine dowli the lille, all accessor)' is available to help make the job easier. Despite the smaJl size oj the
machines, the sheer lIumber of custom accessories makes SherJille able to claim "the most complete 100/
fine ill the world, regardless oJsize. " This photo ollly shows the smaller accessories. Larger olles like the
vertical milling ('o/lIl11n, horizonw/ l1Ii1fblg ('onversion, etc. are not shown here.
accurate for the price. I can only tell them that it is
very accurate for a $460 lathe, but I have no control
over all the markups between here and there that
turned it into a $1500 lathe. Unfortunately,
middlemen contribute to increasing the price with
no corresponding increase in the quality of the
product.
To make matters worse, U.S. manufacturers must
compete with companies that sell products here that
don't have to deal with the higher safety and
environmental standards set by OSHA and the EPA.
I'm not suggesting we should do away with these
agencies, for I believe they are needed to protect
our workers and citizens. I'm only reminding you
of some of the problems that face U.S.
manufacturers.

Good instnJdions make things easy for everyone
Being self taught made me appreciate good
instructions, for I'm sure I have spent at least a
thousand hours trying to sort out the incomplete
instructions that came with some very expensive
machines. I have tried to write instructions that
would be useful and give a novice some insight as
to not only "how" but also "why" you would want
to use an accessory. Once the customer understands
this, their imagination takes over and they may use
an accessory in a fashion I never dreamed of. Sears

once complained that my instructions were too
"folksy." I asked them how many customers have
called with a question about that particular
instruction and who they had available to answer
such a question if one were asked. Sears decided
that my instructions weren't so bad after all.
Sherline's customers are intelligent people who just
don't happen to know too much about machining,
so I don't have to write everything in a style that an
idiot could understand. The more you know about a
subject. the more you know there is always an
exception to a rule. This can make for very boring
and cumbersome instructions if all these variations
are included. Most manufactures of tools solve the
problem of instructions by not giving any except
assembly and safety rules. They do this primarily to
cover themselves in case of a lawsuit. The
instructions also read as if they were written by a
lawyer-which they probably were.
I also know that the longer the instructions. the less
likely they will be read. The trick is to make
instructions for a difficult task shon enough so that
they will be read but long enough to get across all
the imponant information. By carefully choosing my
words I can avoid writing about all these variations
and still be accurate. Craig Libuse then takes my
writing and arranges it with some of his marvelous

drawings and photogmphs, which he takes himself in
our own in-house studio. The process ha'i been simplified
since we purchased a di gital camera. Thi s book, for
instance, will go to the printer on a single C D that will
be used to directl y make the printing plates. No more
lime consuming typesening. pasting and stripping. When
we are done. we have a boo k, sal es literature or
instmctions that we are proud of.
For me the fact that all the work, except printing.
has bee n do ne " in house" is great. It g ives me
complete contro l over the entire process. I can be
my ow n publi sher: however. I do lose the marvelous
marketing capabilities of large publi shing houses. I
am fOnlmate to have the resources now to publi sh
the book myself. because I don't have the time or
the des ire to go from publisher to publi sher begg ing
to get my book printed.
I look at instructio ns the sa me as tooling to build
the product. The better the in structio ns. the lower
th e o ve ra ll c osts. We c on sta ntl y upd ate o ur
instructions to try and eliminate confu sio n. All our
instructions can be found o n our Worldwide Web
s it e (htlp :l/www.she riin e. c o m ) a nd ca n be
dow nloaded for free for your own personal use. I
can't understand why more companies don ' tuse the
Internet in this fashi on. Most of the rules fo r cutt ing
metal remain the same whether your machine tools
are full size or miniature like Sherline tools. Many
amateur machini sts. whether customers or not. find
Ih e in fo rmation we provide th ere use ful. Th ey
apprec iate thi s and we gain by their kind words and
referrals.
Good in struction s also have another key function.
Customers usually ask questions that can onl y be
answered by the most important and costl y people
in the organi zation . Thi s keeps them from doing the
work you had hired the m for. Good instructi o ns
all ow these key people to do the ir jo bs with out
constant interruptions with questi ons that sho uld
have been answered in the instructions in the first
place.

O\'(~ r tile years Ire have seen mallY Sher/ille lOols
II sed ill prodllctioll setups. Sometillle.\· ollly parts of
them, such as the slides or mOlOr alld speed coll1rol
are II sed. heulII.\'e it is cheaper to bur a whole
Sherlill e lathe or miff thall 10 buy or build a
speciali:.ed iI/dust ria! cOlllpOllent. /11 1998 I
immdlleed a lille of slIIal/ mallua! alld CNC-n:{/dr
indllstrial slides based Oil OIl/' macl/ille compollellf.\·
to address tllis //Iarket. Sometimes a slI/a/l clulIlge
is al/ thaI is reqll ired 10 adapt a product to meet the
lIeecl.\· of (III emirelr li eu' markel.

Actuall y, I am sometimes amazed at some of the
projects Ihat are built on Sherline eq uipment. not
onl y because of the complexi ty of the project. but
al so beca use of the size. I have seen projects done
that rea ll y were too big for the machine. but the job
was completed beca use the buil der worked with
what he had. Working with what you have is what
it 's all about with hobby projects. Time is not money
whe n wo rkin g for e njoy me nt in yo ur ho me
workshop. Being a hobbyist myse lf, I've bee n asked
man y times how I have the patience to spend so
many hours working on a model aircraft that could
crash. My answer has always been that it doesn' t
take any. If you arc doing something you enjoy it
d oesn' t take pa tience. Wh a t ta kes pati e nce is
working at a job or for a boss you don' t like j ust to
kee p food o n the tabl e fo r yo ur fa mil y. No nhobbyists believe it takes pati e nce to do sma ll ,
precise work onl y because they don' t enjoy do ing
work like that themse lves.

We ever misrepresent our products

Avision for miniature machining

One thing we try to never do is misrepresent the
capabiliti es of our mac hines. If anyone has eve r
ca lled Sherline to ask. we an swer honestl y, and they
know we never try to se ll a machine to anyone when
it wouldn't be appropri ate for their projects. I don' t
want to waste time on the phone ex pl aining to an
unsatisfi ed customer why you can '{ make a tool steel
shaft three inches in di ameter on a three- inch lathe .

You can spend quite a bit of time and scale down a
set of plans to li t mini atu re tools. and I be lieve you' ll
have a better model because of it. In the future, I
can see plans for hobby projects bei ng sold on a
d isk thai includes a draft ing program. Aft er dec iding
the size you wanllO buil d the project. the program
will print out a sel of dimensioned drawi ngs in the
sca le you choose. Actuall y you could do thi s today
287

with AutoCad®, but no one is yet selling plans in
this format. The problem with this at the present
time is that you can'l scale off-the-shelf items such
as screws, and the model would be very difficult to
build with non-standard fasteners and threads. It will
happen eventually though, because it is a better way.
This will make scaling things down to smaller sizes
easier. Throughout the ages, miniatures have always
had a fascination all their own. Miniature models

are treated like jewelry. Their appeal is based in part
on their size alone, and that helps make them
attractive to people who might otherwise have no

interest in the subject of the mooel itself.
Wheelin' and dealin' for produdion tools
When I originally imported the lathe from Australia,
the only accesso ries that were available for the
Model 4000 lathe were three and four-jaw chucks,
steady rest , live center and a sc rew cutting
attachment. This represented about ten percent of
what was needed for a good accessory line. For me
to take on producing the se machines was a
monumental ta s k without considering the
accessories. Fortunately, I just wasn't smart enough
at the time to realize it.

The Sherline bearing journal boring mac/line is .wifJ
goillg strollg after over 25 years. It has turned out
to be olle of my all-time best machine buys.
I knew I would need machine tool s to produce the
parts I needed and this gave me an excuse to start
buying machine tools. Thi s is the part I loved. I
would go to South Santa Fe Street in Los Angeles
and look for bargains. One machine I came across
had two opposing spindles that would be perfecllo

Sherlille uses some of their OW" tools for small jobs in their production lille. Shown here are a number of
speciallOols usedfor making chucks and collets. Clockwisefrom top left: DrilJillg tommy bar holes, grinding
inside of chuck jaws, checking chuck rIInoul and a setup to center drill, drill, ream and face colJets.
2118

bore the headstock for the bearings. It would require
little modification. There were three of them. The
o nl y problem was they wanted $8,000 for each
machine. This was a bargain when you considered
that they cost over $20,(X)() new, but I cou ldn 't afford
even $2,000. I bored my fi rst run on my Bridgeport
and kept a quiet eye on these machines. Machinery
sa les were terrible at thi s time and the price was
fa llin g. I made my move right before Christmas
when I believed that dealer, like everyone else, would
need money the most. I offered $ 1,500 for one of
them. We negotiated for a wh ile and I ended up
paying $1,700. Every mill or lathe I have sold since
then has had its bearing journals bored on that
machine. I think I made a pretty good deal.

Making chucks tums into quite a challenge
ManufaclUring the three.jaw chuck was my biggest
problem, as it was not a straightforward machining
problem. At the time you couldn 't just program a
CNC machine to cut the spiral scroll , so a spec ial
machine had to be designed and built to do the job.
I ended up milling the spira l using a rotary table
that was geared to the table feed at the correct ratio.
The rotary table, an item that I rescued from a pile
of junk, was driven by an adjustable speed dri ve
that I found in a junkyard where I also purchased
the limit switches I needed. I ended up spending less
than $300 and three days on the project. It took three
and one half minutes to machine the scroll , but the
actua l labor was only the time to load the part. It

o
With modern CNC machines I can now produce all
the parts for this chuck in J5 machine operations.
which is less than 50% of the operations of Ollr first
attempt." and 33% of tlte time. The quality also
improved by 200%... allother reasoll tizatllove CNC
machilles.

turned itse lf off automatically. I shudder 10 Ihink
what it wou ld cost to do a similar project in my own
shop today.
To cut the teeth on the chuck jaws I used a suggestion
from the Sherline shop foreman in Au stralia. It
wasn't the way they were generat ing the teeth at the
time. bUI he told me if he had it to do over again he
wou ld try his idea. I bought my first e lectronica ll y
controlled machine to accomp li sh thi s and cut the
teeth. It worked g reat and we slill mach in e them
thaI way. II took every penny I had [0 get the ch uck
into production because I had to also purchase a large
sc rew machine to make the chuck bodies. We kept
trying different methods to improve the accuracy. It
took man y secondary operations to improve th e
three·jaw chucks a couple percentage points. Many
people are still surpri sed that we manufacture our
own chucks. After going through the learning curve,
I can see why others might not want to take it o n
such a project.

First new Sherline accessory---<l new
screw cutting attachment
The fir st accessory I decided to bui ld wa s a
replacement for th e Australian sc rew c utting
attachment. At thi s time the thought of producing
the entire product li ne wasn'l even con sidered, and
I was just "fooling around." The Au stralian screw
cutting attachment was limited and did not have
enough gear comb in ations . I wanted to cut more
threads in right- and left·hand leads. Most common
thread s are cut with taps and dies. You don't CUi
threads on a lathe unl ess you have to. It is a slow
and cost ly. The thread s yo u may ha ve to cu t are
unique, and taps and dies either can ' t be purchased
or are very expensive. To be worthwhi le, a complete
range of threads was needed. The present system
didn't have enough comb in at ions to be useful. To
build this accessory, gears wou ld be needed. Contract
gear makers could cut the gears, but the cost wou ld
be around two dollars each in re lative ly high
quantity. I had to cut them myself in order to keep
the price low enough to have a customer for this
product. A machinery dealer, who didn 't ask for a
commission, found me a dirty old gear hobber with
a comp lete se t of gears for less than a thou sand
dollars. I cleaned it up and painted it. It worked great
and has cut every gear since. If you are just starting
out and are wi lling to work, it is amazing how much
help is out there if you are not looking just for money.

An apparent step backward becomes a step forward
After cutting a set of gears for my attachment I knew
J had solved only one of my problems. To cut the
expanded range of threads, you couldn't disconnect
the spindle from the lead screw without losing your
place. I wanted to check out my gear combinations;
so I took the motor and speed control off and pm a
crank handle on the rear of the spindle. I set up the

gears for twenty-eight threads per inch. I planned to
make a 1/4-inch diameter, 28 threads per inch bolt
(abbreviated as 114-28). I figured that would be a

good size because there were hex nuts of that size
around my shop I could use to check the thread. I
engaged the lead screw and took my first pass (cut)
by cranking the spindle by hand. I stopped cranking
when I got to the head of the bolt, backed out the
crosslide, and cranked the spindle backwards until I
was at my starting point. The crosslide was returned
to a position that would take the second cut, and I
cranked the spindle and took the second cul. It was
as easy as tapping a hole with a hand tap. You could
SlOp close 10 a shoulder without worrying about
"crashing." I realized it would be perfect for a novice
machinist. This was going to be a tough item to sell,
as hand cranking might appear to be a step in the

wrong direction, but it really worked well. I decided
to put it into production.

PersonaliIing the Instrudions
I think it is also worth noting that Ihis is when I
decided the style of instructions I would write. The
only thing I did change later was to put my name at
the end of these instructions. At that time I didn ' t
believe my name had any value, and I was trying to
establish a value for the "Sherline" brand name.
About ten years later I began to realize that customers
took an interest in what I wrote. I added "Joe Martin,
president and owner" to all the instructions I had
written and still do. I enjoy the fact that people are
finding what I write worth remembering.

Carl Hammons comes aboard again

and the business grows
Carl , my friend and ex-partner, joined forces with
me again in Martin Enterprises. There aren't too
many people who have been partners twice, but we
worked well together. I had acquired a surprising
amount of operating machinery. and Carl'sjob would
be to find contract machining jobs. Carl wouldn't
own any Sherline stock because this corporation was
already formed and Sherline Australia was part

When goingjrom minialllre mac/line tools to full-size shop tools, the costs go up dramatically. Just moving
them call be expensive, so do a lot of homework bejore YOll buy. Sherline:v shop represents over a million
dol/ars i1l tool purc:lwse.\· over the years.

owner. Carl called Hewlett Packard on a day that they
were looking for a new shop to do some contract
machining. and before we knew it we had 35 of our
55 employees doing outside contract work. Our main
customer became Hewlett Packard.
A simple agreement
I was too far along with Sherline and un willing 10
give up any ownership to Carl. Thi s was my "baby"
and I wanted complete control. I had been working
at the new bu siness for three years when Carl and I
joined force s again and had spe nt $90.000 for
equipme nl: there fore . I fell Carl should in vest
$45.000 in additional machine tool s and work one
year without wages for one-third ownership in a new
compan y dedi ca ted to do ing contract machining.
Carl agreed and we became partne rs in Martin
Enterprises. I was now !lat-ass broke. and to survive
I had to make a profit from thi s time forward.
Business is great!
I had two major mail order companies selling our
machines within a ye ar of starting: Sears and
Brookstone. Both were good customers and paid
their bills within 30 days . A major point I"d like to
emphasize at this time is that when you're dealing
with large selling organizations they will always be
more interested in their customers than in your we ll
be ing. They are being ethical to their customers when
doing thi s and nO( being unfair to you. Don ' t expect
them to cover your mi stakes and risk their good
name . Don't expect the m to not go to anoth er
supplier who offers better quality at the same price
or the same quality at lower prices. It is possible to
make a great deal of money dealing onl y with a
sin gle organization like Sears. but you have 10
remember where their loyalty lies.
Sherline had about 25 employees at thi s time and
we were crui sing. I had three rented 2000 square
foot shops next to one another. Darrell, my shop
foreman was doing a good job, and every now and
then I began to fee l a twinge of success.
More work means new and bigger problems
Th e new co ntrac t machinin g work beca me a
nightmare for me. The problems I had to sol ve were
no longer just my own . We wou ld be ove rly
optimistic bidding jobs and lose our ass doing them.
Most of the problems were caused by inexperience
in holding tight IOlerances. CuslOmers would be late
on payment. and I would have to dig into Sherline
funds to make payroll. If a customer had made an
error on their drawing and we had already run their

All operalOr takes advalltage of the CNC cOll1rols
that call be added 10 a lI ewer Bridgeport mil/.
Regardless (?f size, if yoll pial/ TO buy eqllipmem to
do /1/(/chillillg, buy the best mill you cml (/fford. Most
of the deficiellcies (~f a worn Ollt lath e call be
overcome by good technique, bur it is almost
impossible to make good part.~ 011 a worn Ollt mill.

part. they would try to find a way to reject it and not
pay us, We we re doing over $400,000 a year in
contract machining and I gave all up.
What brought th is about was my hand got caught in
a sc rew machine that was running H-P parts. I waS
trapped for 30 minutes before an empl oyee found
me. The machine had to be taken apart to free me.
The reason I was running this machine was the screw
machine setup man was out on another drunk and
H-P wanted the ir parts. My hand was sq uashed but
not broken. and whil e I was sitting in the office
recovering, the buyer from H-P called and threatened
to go el sewhere with their work if I didn ' t quote on
a job th at I believed had tolerances that we re
impossible to hold. Of course. the buyer didn't know
that I had just sq uashed my hand making H-P parts.
and I wasn't in any mood to take any crap from
anyone, but it happened, I reta liated by increasing
their prices by 20%. and guess how much work I
was doing for them the following year? You ' ve got
it - $0. Thi s is one case where we both won.
291

up with a lot of specialized machinery to make
unique parts for other companies. I traded all this
specialized equipment for a couple of new CNC
machines. We would learn to use these new
machines to build Sherline parts. The most
interesting thing was rather than going broke,
Sherline started having money left in the checking
account when I stopped doing contract machining.

Anew home lor Sherline
I started the business in my garage and then moved
into an industrial complex. The first unit rented had
2000 square feet and was quickly filled it up. Each
time a neighboring unit would become available I
would rent it. Having enough room for employees
to work efficiently was important. The end result
was I ended up with five units and had a considerable
rent payment each month. A Realtor stopped by one
day and offered me an opportunity to buy some
industrial land. It looked pretty good so I offered
the price that was asked. I waited for several weeks
for an answer. I then found out that my Realtor didn't
have any agreement with the seller. He was trying
to get that agreement with the seller before making
my offer. Maybe this is why I avoid dealing with
Realtors to this day. By this time, however, I had
convinced myself I needed my own building. The
salesman both succeeded in whetting my appetite
to own a building and encouraged my tendency not
to believe salesmen at the same time.

Chips from this CNC lathe are carried off by a
conveyor belt as metal is removed at a rate of over
two pOlmds a minute. Despite this huge capacity
and tile ability to make rapid tool change!i, the level
of accuracy it call produce is astounding.

Looking lor some land 10 build on
I remembered a couple longtime model aircraft
friends, Granger and Larry Williams, who had some
industrial land for sale. Their agreement had just
ended with a Realtor who had their property listed
over two years without a sale. They agreed to
discount the Realtor 's commission and offered me
the land for $36,000. I agreed on the spot. I would
worry how to pay for it later. The best part came
later when I was infonned that they didn't want the
money in one lump sum for tax reasons. I didn't
think it could get any better than this but it did. I
learned a whole new term at our next meeting:
"subordinate." What it meant is that they would
allow me to build on the property before it was
completely paid for. I still didn't fully understand
the implication but started looking for a contractor.
Lusardi Construction was building most of the
industrial buildings in our area so I approached them.
They had a design-and-build plan that would be
perfect for a business like mine. I had a modest

I never did learn how to bid work, and I didn't own
the new machine (Ools it takes to do the work that
pays well. I should be writing a book called "How
to lose your ass doing contract machining." I guess
we weren't very good at contract work because
nobody seemed to miss us. I tried to be a hero and
find work for my existing employees and lost about
$75,000 in six weeks. Everyone slowed down
because there wasn't much work around at the time,
and the layoff that should have happened six weeks
before finally happened. I vowed that I would never
make that mistake again. It would be hard for the
average person to realize just how hard it was to
come up with the $100,000 working capital I had.
To waste it on employees who would rather be
collecting unemployment was inexcusable.
We kept our best employees and everyone worked
in a more relaxed atmosphere. I found out that just
getting "shop time" doesn't make you any money
no matter what the overall sales may be. We ended
292

started. Carl and I couldn ' t be li eve it, for we still
only had $9,000 in the project at that time. I had
worked in the building trades for 13 years after high
school and it tau g ht me how 10 get a job done.
Althoug h I wasn't a carpenter o r an e lect ri cia n, I
hired a carpenter and, with his help. built the interior
of the building myself to save money. We were going
to need it.

Stretching to grab the brass ring
as opportunity passes by
I be lie ve a perso n goes throu g h life and ha s
opportunities pass by. The opportunities are there
but you have to "stretch" to grab them. Most of the
population let these opportunities pass on by and
then complain about the opportunities that got away.
Ge ttin g our building started and fini shed was a
perfect example of "stretchin g". When opportunity
knocks, answer the door ... don' t just sit in your chair
and ye ll , "Who's thereT Opportunity drops by now
and then. but it doesn't wait around long.

When I moved into myfirsl huilding at 170 Navajo
Street, I had so milch room to spare that I considered
renting a section 0111. After much soul searching I
decided I didn', wafll to be a landlord and soolljifJed
the remaining space with machines producing part.5
jor colllmct customers.

CN( equipment brings us to a new level of quality

building in mind that I thought we could afford.
Lusardi looked over the property and came back with
their suggestions. They proposed a building des ign
that was twice the size we had asked for. It was also
three times the amount of money we could come up
with for a down payment.

When we bought our first CNC lathe it e liminated
many operations and improved the qualit y of the
parts at the same time. I couldn't believe the accuracy
that could be attained with these machines. It was
love at first cut. I immediately started looking for a
NC mill with a tool changer and ended up purchasing
a CNC mill. The difference between NC (numerical
control) and CNC (computer numerica l control ) is
that 10 edit the program on a NC machine you had
to change the paper tape that co ntroll ed the
electronics. On CNC machines you could edit the
program that was contained within the computer.
The 1001 path was generated direct ly from the
software as the machine cut.

Good fortune keeps smiling on us
I was banking with the Bank of America at the time
and I knew Bernie Koston, the president of the local
branch, quite well. I had made and paid back several
small loans to convince him I was a man of my word
and could be trusted. Bernie and my contractor had
a meeting. This is when I found out how important
subordination was. The bank considered the land to
be completely paid for because the land had been
subordinated. The bank felt the lot was wo rth
$55.000 even though we only had $9.000 in it. This
gave us the $55,000 down payment we needed. We
found out later that we had purc hased th e la st
reasonably priced land in the area. Bruce. the
representati ve from Lusardi Construction , convinced
my banker that it would be fooli sh 10 build a small
building on such a good lot. Carl and I took a break
from thi s meeting and we both agreed we were
getting in over our heads. We looked over at Bruce
and Bernie making plans for payment schedules for
the construction loan. I finall y said. "Carl , let 's just
keep nodding our heads until someone says we can ' t
do it." Before long , the bulldozers were tearing up
our lot and our 18,000 square foot building was

As an exampl e, consider CUlling an angle on a CNC
milling machine . The machine must move both the
X-ax is and Y-ax is in unison to generate an angle. A
CNC mac hine would calculate the amount of
move me nt as it was cutting and could c ut at over
100 inches a minute . Thi s fact would change the
way metal parts would be made in the future, for no
lon ger would you ha ve to use spec ial cutte rs and
operations to make complex parts. You could cut a
complex shape al the same speed as you cut a straight
line. In most cases you could generate shapes with
standard cutting tools using just a fe w lines of code.
Thi s allowed me to design part s the way I rea ll y
wanted them. You no longer had to work within the
old constraints of what was (X>ssible.
293

Ball lead screws make prec:ision
CNC ,uning possible

these I could make if I had to. Thi s has given us an
independence that few companies with a complex
product line have.
Cuning speed vs. tool wear

The lead sc rews used on these machines should be
mentioned. They are the interface between the
computers and the mec hanics. The problem of
and defledion
backlash was solved with "baillead screws". These
In order to drill a hole in the most efficient manner
screws have recirculating balls that roll in a groove
you need to know the correct feed and RPM . but it' s
ground into a shaft at a pitch of two tenth s of an
still not that simple. At one feed rate you can drill a
inch. The pitch on these screws has increased over
thousand holes before the drill will get dull and start
the years to achi eve speed s over 1000 inches (25
drilling oversize. A faster feed rate may save 15
meters) per minute. At a pitch of
seconds per hole but the drill will
.200" (5mm ). a lead screw would
have to be changed every 200
ha ve to turn at 5000 RPM to
parts. I'm sure you are thinking.
accomplish thi s speed and is why
"What is so hard about that T It
ball lead sc rews have as high as
isn't until you consider the other
one inch in pitch. Even more
machining operations that are also
amazing was the fact that they
being done to this part at the same
improved the accuracy as they
time. each with it s own set of
increased the pitch. You can make a
problems, then you can see how
.000 I" (.025mm) correction on
complicated it can get.
a good CNC lathe. Think about
For example. end mill s deflect or
that. A slide will accelerate to a
bend according to th e load.
spee d of over 1000 inches a
diameter. and sharpness of these
minute in less than a second, move
cutters. A long end mill can deflect
a short di stance and decelerate.
over ten percent of its diameter at
stop and still be accurate to one ten
the cutting end. This is always
thousandth of an inch. The ball
changing; therefo re program s
sc rew s mu st be very preci se
must be created that allow cutters
beca use a lead screw would be
to get dull while still keeping the
useless if it had any backlash (the Coolant and chips fly and coat the
part in tolerance. We very seldom
amount you have to rotate a lead windows inside this Mazak H400N
write a program that will make a
screw before the s lide mo ves). machining celltel: Sillce you can't
good part efficiently on the first
Ball lead screws are very difficult see what is going OIl, you l/ad
try. It usually takes three or four
to make which makes them quite betler be sure you know exactly
tries until we are satisfied.
expensive; several thou sa nd what is going to happen before ),011
dollars for each axis. The people push th e "cyde start " buttoll Production equipment runs parts
in side the machine. The part is
who so l ve d the lead screw Surprises are usually Illipleasallt.
deluged with coolant so it is hard
problem should be commended as
to see wh at is going on, yet you ha ve to know. If
much as the electronic geniuses who came up with
you stuck your head in there to see what was going
the co mputer co ntrols. At Sherline, we have
on you might lose it. Setting up CNC machines today
machines that have been running over ten years and
is like test flying a new aircraft each time you check
still don't have any noticeable backlash.
out a new program. You will never appreciate how
Machines sometimes pay for themselves in one part run
far these machines will go to try and please you until
In many cases, I could buy an old machine. fix it up,
you put in an offset that is off by one decimal place
make my parts and have it cost me less money than
(a number e ntered into a CNC machin es to offset
I would have spent on a single production run of
the actual diameter and tool length). and you get to
parts from an outside source. I also had control of
watch your machine try to mill your $1000 vise off
when they were run. At Sherline. we make all our
the table! When I first started programmin g NC
own part s in ho use. I o nly contract out plating.
machines (machines that were controlled by a I-inch
painting and a few sc rew machine products. Even
wide paper tape with holes punched in it) I would
294

write programs that would rapid feed up to within
1110" of th e pan and th e n stan fee ding at a
prog rammed rat c. We so on learn ed that if th e
machine fail ed. you wouldn ' t have time to pu sh the
"stop" button before it crashed even if the rapid feed
was shut down two inch es from the parI. With
nothing to lose but time. we switched to bring in g
the tool as close in as possible.

Push the bunon ond hold your breath
We now bring too ls to within 1/ 100" (2. 5 mm ) of
the part at a feed rate of over 1000 inches (25 meters)
a minute. When you consider that on a lathe these
cUlling lools may also be aimed at a Ihree·jaw chuck
turning at 3000 RPM . it takes a lot of faith to watch
it happen without flin ching . Thi s is how modern
machine tool s operat e. Spindle gears ha ve bee n
replaced by elaborate electronic dri ves that will work
in unison with a computer to keep constant surface
c Ulling speeds on a lathe eve n as th e diam eter
changes. Complicated gearboxes have been replaced
by a servo dri ve system that works in uni son wilh
th e spindl e 10 cuI thread s or tap holes at spindle
spee ds con side red impo ss ibl e a few years ago.
Manufacturers can take a CN C machine and turn it
into a very sophisticated dev ice to build their product
o ut of metal in one day. That process could ha ve
taken years to accomplish 25 years ago.

La bor is aI/other factor ill p rodllct cost that is 1I0t
lIecessarily related to part si:e. Oj tell greater skill
and more attel/tion to detail is required whell dealing
with sll/aller parts.

indi vidual startin g out without enough money. My
produ ct couldn ' t be co mpetiti ve if parts we re
purchased fro m outside suppliers. The costs in volved
would eliminate our product line becau se there is a
limit to what customers will pay.

How our company makes money
I always try to make money by havi ng automati c
mac hin es runnin g. I de sign prod uc ts that ca n be
manufactured o n the machines we have. Thi s gives
me control of the costs needed to produce these parts.
I ha ve the cho ice whethe r to use shop time o r just
an e mployee 's direct wages to make a part. This is
very important: because I have to produce a product
at a price a customer will pay. Odd as it mi ght sound ,
pri ces can actually be rai sed easier than they can be
lowered. Lowe rin g prices witho ut co ming out with
a new and better model will irritate custo mers who
paid the hi gher pri ce and deal ers th at already have
this product on their shelves. I usually put off arriving
at a final pri ce until I ha ve produce d a small
production run of PaJ1S.

Corporate "logic" is sometimes hard to explain
I can never understand the logic large corporations
use today where they avoid making their own parts.
They come up with "just in time" suppliers Ihat must
antic ipate that corporati on's future needs. In stead
of havin g craftsman. they have purchasing age nt s.
Instead of machines, they have computers to control
the flo w of these products from out side ve ndors.
Without considering costs. I beli eve we would have
more people working for us if we contracted out the
parts we use. If we run out of a parI. we can put it
into produ ction that da y if needed. A purcha sing
age nt may spend three days tryin g to find a new
suppli er who could deli ver the part in three weeks.
Man y times I can produce thi s part with less labor
than the age nt would spend finding a new supplier.
I be li eve the corpo rati o ns ha ve chose n thi s path
becau se it gives managers a method of shiftin g the
blame when ideas fail. Of course. when quantiti es
get into the hundreds of thousands it could be more
economical to faml the work oul. The type of person
I"m trying to ad vise isn't workin g fo r a large
corporation thaI bu ys in th ese quantiti es, but an

I al ways start by deciding on a projected se lling price
for a new produ c t that should ge t me in th e
"ballpark." I take away the di scounts I must give in
order to se ll it to a dealer. Thi s leaves the amount I
ha ve a vailable for des ig nin g, manufac turing ,
ad verti sing and selling thi s product. From thi s I can
fi g ure th e am o unt I ha ve le ft to spe nd o n
manufacturin g. I neve r add my des ig n cost and
tooling to the final se lling price of a new Sherline
produ ct. I plan for these products to be sold for a
very lon g time. With thi s being the case, this cost
295

happy. The marketplace is too complex for longterm planning. We should spend as much time as it
takes to keep our product quality high. Profit has to
be secondary for long-term success. I have always
kept a li st of things other compani es have done to
me that could be considered irritating. I make sure
we don ' t make the same mistakes. For example, you
wo n' t talk to an answering machine when you
tel ephone Sherline Products. Sometimes people
seem amazed when they call us and an actual person
answers the phone. Long vo ice mail menu s are
almost universally hated, yet most big companies
use them anyway. This is a perfect example of a
compa ny that thinks their own tim e is more
important than that of their customers, and that is
not the message I want to send to people trying to
call my company.

These /ailstock extrusions would take no 10llger 10
cut off if they were twice as long or ten times as
long. Small parts often require just as much or more
lahor than larger parts.

Accessory line developed to augment
the machines' capabilities

becomes insignificant to an indi vidual sa le if you
amortize it over a long period. You don't have to
make money on every product as long as you can
make money on the complete product line. You have
to know your customers to accomplish this. It would
be difficult to be a success at a new business if you
have to hire people to give you this information. In
other words, " If you want to lose yo ur ass, get
in volved finan ciall y in something you know little
about."

After putting the Sherline lathe into production in
the United States my ambition was to come up with
accessories that would allow my customers to make
very complex parts on their "kitchen table." One of
the problems of manufacturing machines of this size
is yo u ca n ' t u se accessories from other
manufacturers. Manufacturers of full-size machines
have the advantage of not having to build a ll the
accessories and attachments for them . We didn't
have that "advantage," and I've always looked at
thi s as a plus. The market is simpl y too small for
someone to produce an accessory that will just fit
one machine, lea vin g the market for Sherline
accessories to me. The average vise we use in our
plant costs more than any machine I sell , so you can
see why no one else is interested in buildin g
accessories that se ll for less than $100 to a very
limited market. I started out by producing the most
popular accessories and have made new accessories
available every year. I keep thinking I have finally
finished when I get a telephone call from a customer
with a particular problem. This, in tum, gives me an
idea for another accessory. Not all are bi g sellers,
but they give a certain group of customers the ability
to build that very complex part on thei r "kitchen
tables". It has finally worked out because now the
accessories actually represent a hi gh percentage of
our sales.

Build to succeed, not to "not fail"
When I became committed to building the Sherline
tool line, I never considered the possibility of failure.
That helped me make a very important deci sion as
to how many parts to build. If you build too many,
you may run out of money and your creditors wi ll
put you out of business. Bank s only want to lend
money to companies that don't need it. On the other
hand , if you don 't make enough parts, you' ll lose
your customers by not being able to deliver what
you promised. What I did was not make a batch of
say, two hundred lathes. The logic I used was that
after I sold the two hundred machines I would be in
exactly the same situation ... out of machines. I was
somewhat broke, so I built a thou sand or so of the
parts that didn ' t have any expensive material and
down to a hundred of the parts that were high in
labor or material s. This kept me from running out
of everything on the same day.

Today's problems are more important than tomorrow's

One of the problems I have is dealing with the ideas
that come in from customers. If I look at it and tell
them it is something I'm planning to manufacture

We always take care of today's busi ness fi rst. These
are problems you can solve and customers will be
296

The dubious value of a patent

anyway , I'm sure they will be very skeptical. Ideas
can be easy to come up with on a product such as
this. All I have to do is look in a catalog and make
what they make for full-size machines. The real
problem is coming up with a way of manufacturing
them at a cost that we believe the customer will pay.
I have made arrangements to pay royalties on a few
occasions to people who have put a special effort
into their idea. I don't copy other people' s products,
but some things are so basic that there is only one
way to build them. These items will always look the
same.

What if someone does decide to steal your design?
Even if you have a patent, you wi ll find you probably
can ' t affo rd to defend it in court if the compa ny
stealing your design can afford more lawyers than
you can. Carl and I hold th e ba s ic pat e nt on
computerized timekeeping. We applied for it lo ng
before IBM had a PC on the market. Today there
are millions of dollars spent on products that should
fall under the control of our patent. We spent several
thousand dollars and a tremendous amount of effort
to get that pate nt , and , in a se nse, th at effo rt was
wasted. Patent attorneys don ' t inform you how hard
it is to protect a patent, because they make their li ving
getting the patent for you. The standard defense
against your patent is to try and prove that your idea
was common knowledge. Most people don't realize
that a patent on a new process or product can be
impossible to enforce if it has been suggested in print
anywhere in the world . You could end up wasting a
lot of time and money to have a patent cert ificate to
decorate your wall. On the other hand, it is wise to
have a thorou gh patent search done to keep fro m
producing a product that already has an enforceable
patent on it. Of course, I' m not an anomey and I'm
talking in generalities to make you awa re of the
proble ms with patents, but I do have a co uple of
patents that neve r made any mo ney for anyo ne
except the patent attorney. Again, remember that the
patent attorney makes money by getting you a patent
and may be the la'it one to inform you that your patent
could be worthless and impossible to enforce.

The Martin-Hammons Carburetor
Carl and I came up with a carburetor for model
airplane engine for which we recei ved a patent. Carl
came up with the basic idea, which was a variable
venturi. and I came up with a fuel metering system
to co ntrol th e speed. The prototype worked
reasonably well , and we applied for a patent. I was
busy doing contract machining, and Carl put it into
production . It turned out to be a di saster. We just
didn ' t have the skill or the correct production tool s
to make the low cost, highl y accurate parts needed
for this type of product. Carl was spending a great
deal of time working on the patent. When I took a
closer look I found out that various similar patents
had been awarded on carburetors of this type, and
the patent that Carl had been working on was only
for the slot that controlled the rate the cone was
raised or lowered. To me the patent was worthless
and the parts we made over and over again weren't
much better. Carl salvaged enough parts to put about
500 together and they lasted for more years than I
care to remember. I think it was too different to be
succes.<;ful.

Ne<essity is the mother of produdion
I started buying old machine tool s that I believed I
needed for production. I became an expert at taking
a worn out machine, fixing it , and putting it back to
work. I have a natural love for machinery similar to
that of a farmer who lo ves hi s land. It is hard to
describe, but it is very rewarding to set up a machine
to make parts automatically. I'm sure a farmer gets
the same feelin g when watching hi s crop being
harvested. I remember an injection molder running
at Kraft Systems that had a 45-second cycle time to
make a plastic part. The worst profit we could make
was fi ve dollars per shot , and the mac hine would
run all day unattended. It was like having an oil well
in yo ur bac k yard. I have never been nearl y as
successful a'; that machine, but I keep on trying.
Today we have to put our efforts in new and modem
equipment. Old CNC machines can be like a fl eet

The M-H variable vel/tllr; carburetor for model
aircraft engines earned a paten! of limited value.

m

customer's distrust of my company 's success. At that
time, the machines cost less than three hundred
dollars, and yet the sa me customers who were
reluctant to buy a Sherline tool were buying imported
cars for thou sands of dollars, which didn't have a
track record and had fewer guarantees than my
machine. The money spent on hobby tool s has to be
ju s tified to th e customer, and eve n after
manufacturing this product line for more than thirty
years we still encounter customers who are reluctant.
On the other hand we ha ve the ni cest customers
anyone could ever ask for, because hobbyists are a
great group of honest, hard working. intelli ge nt
people. When I wa'i first starting out I had to attended
trade shows by myse lf, and when nature called I
would walk away from my booth and leave it
unattended. I can't ever remember something being
stolen. I don ' t think I would try that with any other

of old truck s. They can become more of a problem
than an asset. Machine tool s are the great equalizer
in a world economy. Machine tools cost the same to
operate worldwide. and when the cost of the machine
becomes greater than the cost of labor, low-cost labor
doesn't ha ve suc h an effect and gives me an
opportunity to compete.

For me, it's a sporting event
Don't get me wrong. I don't invest in my new ideas
just to make money. I' ve always found that the
people who work only for money don ' t seem to have
much. To me, it is more like a sporting event where
my machines are my players and I'm the coach. Of
course. I have employees and they are very important
to the company, but in today's market there are few
products that could be manufactured with manual
mac hin es. Co mput er controlled machines have
allowed a low volume producer like me to exist
because they allow one machine to do many tasks.
In a sense. you are teaching the machine how to make
the parts and teaching the employees how to set up
and program the machine. A good employee today
is no longer a tireless worker with quick hands, but
rather a very intelligent person who knows how to
make a CNC machine work harder. CNC machines
are marve lous machines that never complain, and
every day they are doing jobs once considered
impossible. I love them.
The score of thi s game is tallied in the sales fi gures,
and I'm gratified when someone buys our product.
The difference between a salesperson and me is that
r m happy because someone thought my idea and
product was good enough to spend their money on.
while a sa lesperson is happy because they closed a
dea l. The skill of "closing a deal" was o ne I ne ver
exce ll ed at, so my sati sfaction comes from the
acceptance of our products.

group.
Working with skilled employees
Machining is a slow process because parts are made
one at a time . The interesting thing is, a skill ed
machinist may take almost as long to make the same
pan as a novice. Shortcuts usually end in failure.
Unlike some other trade s, mi stake s cannot be
cove red up. The re are no erasers, whiteout or
"putting-on tools" for machinists.
I' ve never met a good craftsman who wants to do a
job over, even when they get paid for it. It's against
their nature . I also never met a good craftsman who
didn't have to do a job over because of hi s own
mistakes. This is a good time to stay away from them
because they are mad at themse lves. The fact is you
can't work with this many types of tools, dimensions.
and material s without making an occasional error.
The trick is not to make errors when it counts. Good
toolmakers will work with an entirely different
attitude when they are making an inexpensive fi xture
than they will when they work on a part that has
thousands of dollars worth of material and labor in
it. I can compare it to a driving a facecar at over 100
mph to cruising down the highway at 65 mph.

What's the worst that could happen?
Before startin g on a ne w venture, I arrive at an
est imate of the percentage J have for success. This
number is really just an educated guess, but it does
give me some insight into the odds. I always know I
may fail before I start a new project, and if I do fail
I can put it behind me. Not knowing what is going
to happen tomo rrow makes life exciting. and I'm
very happy I have a choice.

Another thing I enjoy is detennining how a particular
part will be run through the shop . Design ing new


When I first started marketing Sherline tool s I was
held back because of the customers' reluctance to
buy a product that was relatively new on the market.
I would get questions that would express a potential
298


Most of thi s knowledge I've gathered has been
learned the hard way because money was too tight
to hire experts. At Sherline we make all of are own
parts and only "co ntract out" the plating, heattreating, and powder coating. In the past, we have
also done a lot of contract machining and I'v e
learned the probl ems one can get into by findin g
errors in ··inspection". It 's just too late. Parts mu st
be in spected as they are built, not after the entire
batch has been run. Errors that are found after the
parts are made mean you start over. Design errors
found after the parts arc made will always result in
scrap. The only difference is who pays for the scrap.

The credit for a good port goes to the craftsman
Good craftsmen know when they have made an
exceptional part and get much sati sfacti on from it.
They also have the ability to produce good work on
machines that should be in a junkyard; it just takes
them lon ger. I ha ve a grea t re spec t for good
c raft smen be cau se the y have to work without
exc uses or erasers. I try to keep reminding you of
this fact in this book because it 's the craftsman , not
the machine, who builds the beautiful things we see
daily in thi s world. Modern machines have given
this talented group of people a way to produce more
and better work, but it will always be their "touch"
that makes those parts beautiful. In my eyes. they
just don't seem to get enough respect.

Taking advantage of the Internet
Our web site has been a very good in vestment for
both th e customers and Sherline dealers. What
inspired me 10 put the effort into hav ing Craig make
a very complete site was I believe it is the way of
the future, and I didn ' t want to be left behind. What
I really like about it is you don't have to li ve with
mi stakes because you just had 25 ,000 copies of
something printed. Information is easi ly corrected
or updated-instantly . I felt that if we did a reall y
good job we wouldn't have to change it, and it could
be useful for years, jusllike the good tooling I keep
referring to. I believe we have created a useful site
by including plent y of good information such as

~--- -.,..- -

, ~-

......

-

....

- ,-~

.....

-~-

...., - ... . -

SHERLINE Precision Miniature Machine Tools
~.-

................ ..... . . ......... ..-.
'-"-

- . ~-

~- - -

~-~

An Imemet site is an inexpensive way to reach a lot
of people who might not be able to find you in other
~vays. Another advamage is tliat it goes world wide.

instruction s for our machines and accessories for
our customers and pote ntial customers to examine.
We also reach a readership that is worldw ide. This
ca n be impossib le w ith standard ad verti s in g
method s. We have pick ed up a number of new
distributors in other countries because of our web
page. Our dealers and we ha ve a lso made an
increased number of direct sa les overseas because
fax and e-mail communi cations mak e it easy fo r
anyone looking at a web page to order. Time of day,
long di stance phone call s and the language barri er
are much less of a problem. The bulk of the web
site was put together over a period of about fo ur
month s, and has been cons tantl y ex pand ed and
improved over the years. The most interesting thing
is how inexpensive it is. It costs only $500 to $700
a year for a very large site. Compare that with a two
by three inch ad that costs $ 1,000 and is hislory once
the next issue comes out. I believe onl y the surface
of the Internet has been scratched and it will keep
grow ing for many years. It represents the leading
edge of the " information revolution" that is to our
e ra what th e indu strial revo luti o n wa s to our
grandparents and great grand parents.

Steps in the design of a new product
I enjoy having customers call and te ll me about a
bu s ine ss th ey started by being able to build
prototypes with Sherline machines. You should
never commit yourself 10 a design until you have at
least built a crude mock-up that you could hold in
your hand . Looking at it from every possible angle
will be very helpful to you. Usuall y you wi ll start
making changes in your design before your prototype
299

to. A ball bearing would be an example of this. Then
Carl would make a quick set of drawings. From this we
build a mock-up to get an idea how it will look. The
next step is to consider manufacturing methods while
trying to work with the equipment you have. This is
where you can go aOitrny. A product has to have a certain
look, and that look shouldn't be sacrificed to make it
easy to manufacture. Don't make it look like the design
was picked because it was easy to manufacture.
There are now 3-D computer programs that can do
this on the screen amazingly well. We have one, but
we still build a prototype as well, the old fashioned
way... one part at a time. For $300,000 you can even
buy a machine that will make a plastic part directly
from your CAD designs. When large companies
spend this much money for a machine that is only
good to develop a shape you can look at, it should
give you some idea of the value of what can be
gained from seeing an actual prototype. Again, don't
design a product that is just easy to build. It has to
look good enough for a potential customer to buy it.
Some products need a compact, modem look and
others require a massive look, but these designs
should always be pleasing to the eye. Don't use the
first idea that pops into your head. I very seldom (if
ever) come up with an original idea after nine AM
because I am a "morning person." I don't have any
problems running the business in the afternoon, but
new ideas come to me long before I get to work. It
is wise to analyze yourself so you know when is the
best time for you to plan for the future.

PRODUCT EXAMPLE- Th;s racecar aligwnem
system ;.'1 typical of many of the products rve
produced because I've gotten involved ill what they
are used for. This .~ystem had many advallfages
considering it sold for less than $2000. It never
returned a profit because I misread the market. I
should have made a $3()(x) unit with digital readows.
It took me IOllger to wr;te the i1lStructiolls than to
design the product.
Why the motorhome manufacturer put a light-duty hitch
on a big motorhome is beyond me. but I was the one at
fault for not checking its rating. Of course I immediately
had a better hitch put on my motorhome, but I felt I
needed a simple way to check the hitch weight. I made
a simple hydraulic sca1e by making the piston and cylinder
equal to one square inch of surface area

After we have decided on a suitable design, detailed
drawings are prepared in a computer aided drafting
program called AutoCad®. We may have to change
the design again as we make the first production
run of parts, and we run these parts in a sequence
that allows for change whenever possible.
Towing a racecar leads to another produd line
I was towing my racecar home after a race and
something just didn't seem right. The tow vehicle
was a 29-foot motorhome and the racecar was in a
26-fool enclosed trailer. It was dark when I stopped
and looked inside the trailer, checked the tires and
hitch and couldn't find anything wrong. I went on
my way, but it still felt like the car was loose in the
trailer. I made it home, but the next morning I found
that I was towing the trailer with all the hitch welds
broken except one. When I looked into it, I found I
had the hitch overloaded by a factor of2.5. The hitch
shouldn ' t have had over 350 pounds loaded on to it.

The hydraulic trailer tongue weight .\'cale was eaJY
to make arid addressed a portion of a market that
was withollt competition
](X)

The suspended versioll of the
Sher/ille hydraulic scafe was
cOllceived of as a companion
unit to the trailer scale to aid
trllcker.\· loading heavy items
for shipping. II ~· tarled 0//1 as
a slow .~· e lle r but has now
found entirely new markets
amollg farm e rs. elevator
companies. utility companies
and 11Iany other applicatio1ls
Ire Iwd I/ot considered when
designing it. Like the trailer
scale it is also e(uy to make
and has been (/ profitable
siddilll'.
hitch on a big mOlOrhome is beyond me. but I was
the one al fault for not checking its rating. Of course
I immediatel y had a better hitch put on my
motorhome, but I felt I needed a simple way to check
the hitch weight. ) made a simple hydraulic scale by
making the pi ston and cylinder equal 10 onc square
inch of surface area and us ing an in e xpe nsive
pressure gauge that reads in pounds per square inch
(PSI). One pound of weight creates one pound of
pressure on the one square inch cylinder, so the PSI
gauge reads in pounds. It worked well , and) decided
to produce one that looked more professional than
my prototype. This was something I could easily
manufacture. and I considered thi s a good gamble.
Along with the scale we included a useful booklet
that Craig and I put together on towing trailers. We
were lucky to find a nationwide distributor to market
it for us. They have sold several thousand units now,
and I believe we made the roadways a little safer for
all of us. It all came about becau se of my error, yet
it ended up making a few bucks for the company.

product s are easy to manufacture in my fa cility and
add to our overall profit.

BoHling poorly wriHen manuals

fo lea,n Aufo(od®myself
My dear fri end and partner Ca rl passed away in
September, 1997. Thi s was a g reat loss fo r me as
we had been through a tot together. I al so real ized
that I now had no opti on but 10 learn a co mputerdraftin g program . Up until then. Carl had done all
my detailed drawings and there wasn' t anyone e lse
in the organi zation who had the time to take o n thi s
task. ) couldn't go to school becau se we needed our
drawings do ne now, not several mo nths fro m now
when a class would graduate. I was reluctant to hire
someon e becau se it wasn' t a full time pos itio n. I
decided it would be easier for me to learn computer
drafting than to teach a new empl oyee our product
line. Carl and I worked together for so long I knew
I couldn't repl ace him , and it he lped me to ease the
pain of hi s death by di ving into thi s new endeavor. I
started working at home to e limin ate the con stant
intenuptions at work. The difference between a word
processing program and a drafting program is that a
letter can be written with a word processing program
without knowing the slightest bit about the program .
This isn' t the case with drafting programs. At fi rst I
had trouble just putting a line on the screen. I we nt
out and bought a couple of the popular books on the
subject. When I finall y drew a box and wanted to
dimension it, ) looked up that subject in the index
and found the first information about dimension s
was on page 700. ) knew then that I was in trouble,
but I had an "ace in the hole"- Friends.

Studying at the "University of Friends"
My friend Jerry Nelson had started teaching himself
computer drafting several month s before and was
"over the hump" on learning thi s program. I call ed
him and he taught me enough over the phone in 15
minutes to do my first drawing. I couldn ' t get thi s
mu ch usabl e information fro m the boo ks aft e r
studyin g them for the previou s week. The books I
read were typical of the technical manuals I' ve had
to deal with for the better part of my life. It isn' t that
the subject is so difficult , it is the method that the
information is fed to you. You never know whether
you are getting the main course or a snack. The main
purpo se of an en g ineered drawing is to con vey
dimensions 10 the person who is going to build o r
use the part. To give you 700 pages of BS before
getting into the meat of the matter is another example

I then thought that the world needed a low cost 2.5ton hanging scale using the same simple hydraulic
method. These are usually called crane sc ales and
are quite expensive. I felt that a scal e would be still
useful even if it weren't acc urate to .5%. It could
still be useful for loading. You don't get into trouble
making 50-pound errors when it comes to loading
trucks. Troubl e comes when they make big errors,
and thi s scale would help prevent that I was right,
and we found a goOO mail order company to market it.
While I wouldn ' t wanl to own a company that only
offered these two scales as a product line, these two
301

of a fail ed attempt 10 teac h a subject. As th e
instructions I write keep getting longer and more
complex I use these as examples to remind myself
how nollo do it.

couple of days I could produce what used to take
several months. You should also note that when I
design a new part the design includes how the part
will be made in our machine shop. As an example, I
designed the quick-change tool post along with the
tool holders over a single weekend. I'd be working on
several new projects at the same time. If I ran into a
problem with the design , l'd sw itch to another
project until I'd come up with an answer to the
problem. IfI weren't inspired with a good idea I'd
work on the existing drawings. I don't think any of
my employees believed I would ever finish the
drawings; howe ver, they weren't around when I
started and wou ld work an unbelievable amount of
hours to finish a project on time. They didn't realize
how persistent I cou ld be. I'm happy to stale that
all our drawings (around 900 now) are up to date
and in the same fonnat today.

learning AutoCad®
The first task I look on 10 learn Ihe program was 10
layout and design a set of bevel gears that could be
cut on a Sherline mill using a rotary table mounted
on an angle plate. By drawing the cross sectional
view accurately, the angles needed to cut this gear
could be laken directly off the drawing without using
a trig table or a calculator. I was beginning to see
the light.
I' m getting preuy good at usi ng Ihe program now,
and il has put a lot of the fun back in designing for
me . Looking over Carl's shoulder at an assembly
designed by computer was of no help for me. I would
need a standard , full -size or larger layout to design
with. I've si nce found that doing the design totally
myself has become the perfect way for me to work.
I love the program. It has made me more productive
than ever.
I'm fascinated with the program because it does a
drawin g without errors when used properly. The
program eliminates much of the boredom of adding
and subtracting numbers as you go. Accuracy isn 't
attained by the precision of your lines but rather by
(he accuracy of (he infonnation the program is given.
Angles are not derived from a protractor and using
divider points but from calculations by a computer
10 as many decimal places as needed. I learned
drafting in high sc hool back in the fifty 's. My
problem was I was a slob when it came to drafting a
pretty drawing. My numbers and views would be
correct, but my lettering and lines weren't neat
enough. Things have changed now with the aid of
thi s program, and my leuering is just as good as the
best. I can no longer spill gobs of ink on an almost
completed drawing and have to start over. 1 can
change my mind as much as I want without irritating
anyone. I'm a happy man.

GeHing the .hop to develop flow ,harts
For years I had been trying to get the machine shop
to document the procedures to manufacture each
part. I had talked for hours on the subj ect to Carl,
my partner, and Karl, my shop foreman, to no avail.
I even hired someone to help them . You just can't
threaten the most important people in your business
to get something done. The loss of Carl drove home
the need to get thi s done. I was burying Karl with
new parts to make, and he finally realized there
wasn't a chance in hell of remembering all the
proc edure s needed to produce all the different
complex parts we now manufacture. Finally we have
job folders on each part that have the machining
sequence, machining times, programs, tooling, setup
in structions and exactly where the tooling and
programs are stored. Thi s was also no small
undertaking , and the job fo lders took many
thousands of dollars worth of time to document.
I then entered the machine time and labor cost and
material cost obtained into a marvelous Microsoft
spreadsheet program called Excel that allowed me
to get our true manufacturing costs of each product.
Until then 1 was relying on an old job-costing sheet
for these numbers. It turned out that it wasn't being
updated properly and we were losing money on some
sales. When you're se lling something for less than
it cost to manufacture it you can't make up for it
with increased sales. I raised prices and restructured
the discount schedule. These are the "dammed if do
and dammed if you don 't" type of deci sions you get
stuck with as you get bigger.

Opening the floodgate. of design
Since learning the program, I have added man y
accessories and put many new products into
production. As I became better at using the program
I found that I now could easily design a new product.
I had many ideas in the back comers of my mind. 1
would take a break from the boredom of reviewing
and redoing the hundreds of existing drawings and
design something new. It was a piece of cake. In a
J02

o ut wuys. but to fil e a bored hol e to its correc t
position is next to imposs ible. The thi ngs you do on
a mill ha ve to be do ne right the firs t ti me. If you
plan on steppin g up fro m miniat ure loo ls 10 fu ll size machin ery, the cos t. pa rt icula rl y the cos t of
accessori es. will rise dramatica lly. Another thing you
will find is th at these machines arc n't as much fun
to operate.
Before buying any full -s ize mach inery. I would give
it a lot of thought. because the cost and space th is
type o f equipment lake is substanti al. Even if Y
Oll
can afford the ex tra money and have the space. thcy
will no t brin g yo u happ iness unl ess you ha ve a
delinite need fo r them.
Ollce I learned AuroCad®. nell' desigl/s pOll red 0111
ill a hllrry. Betwee1l 1997 aI/(/ 1999 Illest' lire j llst
sOllie (~r Ih e lIe ll' prodllcts Ihal were added 10 the
IiI/e. A/so i1llrodllced were Ihe indllstria/lill e 0 1/ page
28 7 and a lIew qllick-change 100 / pOSI system.

Alinle advise on purchasing full size machines
I would like to give you some views I have come up
with afte r spending well ove r a million doll ars on
machinery. I' m address ing thi s mainly to the portion
of our cu stomers who will end up moving up in size
to standard machine tools. The fi rst machine I would
buy would be a Bridgeport® vertical mill . These
machines haven ' t chan ged fo r years beca use Ihey
are just right th e wa y they are. Mo re success ful
bu sinesses have bee n started with thi s marve lous
machine than an y other. You can build prototypes.
toolin g and production parts with thi s mac hin e.
There are imported copies of the Bridgeport, but they
do n' t see m to ha ve th e qualit y o f the ori g inal.
Althou g h thi s book is writte n abo ut ho me shop
machining. I'm also trying to give you some in sight
into produ cin g metal produ cts. If you happen to
co me up with a great idea. you may want to build
these parts Y
Ollrscif and start a business.
A mill is us uall y more important th a n a lath e:
therefore. it has to be in beller conditi on. Yo u can
still make good parts on a lathe that may have made
parts for the First Wo rld War. A littl e filin g .Uld
po li shin g and you have a good part. On the other
hand , trying to work with a mill th at has worn out
slides creutes a different probl em. T he forces that
are ge nerated uS end mill s cui ca n come fro m any
direction . A lathe gene rales most cuttin g forces
stmight down toward the bed. You can al ways bring
a di ameter to size with a tile o n a lathe with worn

Buying used machines at an audion
I have purc h.lsed mac hine ry fro m eve ry so urce
avail abl e. but I like auctio ns the best. It is a ga me
that is played fo r hi g h stakes. an d high -d olla r
machines are o ft en sold in less ti me tha n a fiftydoll ar vise. It takes two people who rea ll y want a
parti c ul ar mac hin e to ge t the price it is actuall y
worth . If YOll have many bidders. the price may go
way beyond what would be considered a good buy.
At th at time the aucti o n may turn into a bidding
contest th at leaves common se nse behind . Kn ow
your limit before you start biddin g and know what
the mac hine is rea ll y worlh . O f co urse. I d idn 't
al ways foll ow thi s rule and ended up buying a few
"turkeys". but that was part of the fun. Buying used
machines fro m a dea ler has so me adva nt ages. and
Illan y times it can be more econo mica l than an
aucti on. In additi on. you can usuall y get a mo neyback guarantee. Yo u can' t eve n get that o n a new
machine. Puttin g large machines in pl ace is cost ly
for bo th parti es, so you have to be s ure of yo ur
decisions.

Choosing between mechanical and CNC machines
If you are trying to build a product and you need to
produce a parti cular part. you may have a cho ice
be twee n a co mpute r con trol and a mec hani cal
machine . CNC machin es have been more reli able
than mec hanical machines fo r me . There are more
employees available tooay who are tmined 10 operate
these machines. If you bought an o ld CNC machine
without documentation you may have bought a piece
o f ju nk unl ess there is someone in your areu who
ca n fi x it. You mu st know if you can get it fi xed
before you buy il. A techni cian a thou!o>and mi les
away will not be o f much help if it is goi ng to cost
you $2000 in travel expenses to fi x a $ 100 problem.
303

I look at CNC machines differently than mechanical
machines. They are more like automobiles and have
a limited life. If you can afford it, buy a new CNC
machine. Often they will be able to make a better
part in half the time it takes a machine that is seven
years old, and time is money.

Anew home for Sherline
The last few years had become the most productive
years of my life and I'm still amazed by the amount
of work I produced. My partner, Carl died when I
was just starting to write this book. You can't help
but take a close at your own life after your best friend
passes on. I did and realized I had only scratched
the surface of what I wanted to accomplish, but
where to start? What I wanted more than anything
was a modern manufaclUring facility that I could
truly be proud of. The building I had built almost
twenty years earlier now was turning into ajunkyard
because of the limited floor space. I had more
equipment than room, but I had to deal with my more
immediate problems first.

Back to seventy hours a week
I was at a point with this book that I was committed
to finishing it. I got Craig started on creating the
fOJ1Tlat I wanted him to follow throughout the book.
This allowed me to take a break from writing while
Craig caught up with me with the graphics and
switched my attention to my most immediate
problem: the product drawings. I never realized what
a mess I had on my hands until I had to find a drawing
myself. I'd find several drawings of the same part
with several variations. There were also several
variations of the AutoCad drawings stored on disk.
Carl had the ability to keep these sorted in his head
and could pick out the proper drawing from a pile
stacked on his desk in moments. We couldn't. The

The facility at 2350 Oak Ridge Way was a nice
building, but even before we moved in I realized il
was not going to be big enough for our future needs.
II became our temporary home for two years.

closer I looked, the worse it got. Now that I knew
more about AutoCad, I realized the drawings didn't
have any standard. Carl must have stopped working
on the drawing the moment the printed version was
suitable to send to the shop. We had around 450
different drawings at that time drawn in many
formats. You have to realize just how serious a
problem this was. If we manufactured a part to the
wrong version of his drawings it could result in
thousand of dollars worth of scrap. This was a
problem that I had to sort out because I was the only
one in the company who truly understood how the
parts had to fit together and the allowable tolerances.
Since right after Carl died I had started waking very
early and it became a blessing. All the drawings were
brought up to date between 4 AM and 10 AM. This is
the time my mind is at its best. I hired a
professional to help me decide on a drawing fonnat.
I still didn't know enough about the program to get
me started on this gigantic task. I then started to
replace any drawing in doubt before putting it on
the production floor. The first drawings were very
time consuming for me to produce, and having ten
hours in a drawing wasn't unusual. If I found
something I didn't like about the format we were
using, I would go back and change all the drawings
I had done up to that point to the same format. I
wasn't going to fall into that trap again. It took about
eighteen months of hard work to get the production
drawings to the point I began to have confidence in
them again.
I still had to be very involved in the day-to-day
operations; however, I could solve problems such
as these on the spot at any time of day. I finished the
missing chapters in this book and again started
thinking about a new home for Sherline. An
advertisement came in from an industrial Realtor
that had pictures of a building that looked just right.
I looked around but this still seemed to be the best
deal in town. The building was around 30,000 square
feet and was to be built in a brand new industrial
area. I didn't want a building that was surrounded
by old buildings. Modern industrial parks and
buildings in California have changed dramatically
in the last few years. The buildings are designed to
look good, withstand earthquakes and have sprinkler
systems. I wanted one. The selling price was around
$2.2 million including improvements, and I eagerly
put my name on the contract. It would take about
six months to complete the new building.

The new accessories bring home the need for more
manufacturing floor space

be tween the two shops. There were so me ni ce
looking buildings in that area and a " Build to Suit"
sign on the remaining lots. There was one lot on top
of the hill on the end of a cul -de-sac that I had to
have. A beautiful ocean breeze would come through
every afternoon , and it overlooked a small vall ey
with a residenti al area with expensive homes on the
opposite side. It had a better view than the homes
did. It also was located next to a l6-acre green space
area and would have an ocean view from the west
facing second floor. Thi s is where I was go ing to
build my monument (building) "come hell or hi gh
water."

The new building turned out great and I moved
Sherline into it and left Martin Enterprises in the old
building. Remember that Martin makes the parts
and Sherline assembles, sells and ships the product.
Sherline hadn ' t even moved completely when I
realized I had screwed up. I not only didn ' t allow
enough room for Sherline, there also wasn' t any way
I co uld fit the machine shop in there without
crowding the machines. Can you imagi ne the
thoughts going through my mind when I had just
purchased a $2.2 million building and it was too
small? I never moved the machines into that building
and started putting money aside for my next move.
Putting money aside was difficult because I was also
buyin g Carl's share of the Martin Enterprise
partnership from his wife at the same time.

When I fin ally got to talk to the developers I found
out that the builders were a fami ly operation. After
having the last building built by a large corporati on,
I liked the thought of being able to talk directl y to
the people that could make it happen, and we struck
a deal fo r a building with a 55,000 sq ft (5 120 sq
meters) pad on 3.5 acres (12 ,263 sq meters). The
buildin g would be of tilt-up concrete construction
25 feet hi gh. The architect ca me up with a basic
des ign. He also worked in AutoCad and said he
would e-mail me the design to work with. I changed
the bas ic layout so the building faced the valley
rather than the street and made a change to the shape
so the building looked and fit the lot better. The office
would have a glass front overlooking the valley. My
office would have an additional view of the ocean.
Now all I had to do was come up with more money
than I had to pull this deal off.

There was an empty lot across the street that would
be perfect to put up a building for the machine shop
on. The people that I bought the new building from
owned it. I talked to them about it and couldn ' t get a
direct answer and was geuing upset when calls were
not getting returned. I needed lO make plans now
bec au se sa les were up another 30% and th e
employees at Martin were packed in like sardines.
When I found out that they sold all their remaining
lots to another deve loper I was pi ssed and on the
move agam.

Home at last
I thought about it for about an hour and remembered
some ni ce lots I had been driving by on the road

We got it right with the bllilding at 3235 Execlltive Ridge. My office window looks Ollt Ofl the Pacific Oceall
to the left and the windows facing the camera look Ollt over a valley with the mOllntains ill the distance to
the South. This is aftttirzg monument to the company's success and offers room for future growth.
305

wasn't sure whether I could stretch out and grab that
elusive "brass ring" again.
Don't forget to have fun

The infonnation I have provided in this book comes
from all sorts of places. Sometimes you learn
something when everything goes right. Most of the
really valuable things I have learned, however, came
along with a certain amount of either physical or
financial pain. If I have saved you some of that pain
and provided some entertainment in the process, this
chapter has been a success. The main point I want
to leave you with is too not to put so much
importance on the destination that you forget (0 enjoy
the journey. I have always found that I am happier
and more enthusiastic when starting a new project
than I am right after I have finished one. Before I
am done with anything, I find I am usually thinking
about what I want to do next. Strive to take your
work beyond the level of a laborer or even a
craftsman. Work not only with your hands and your
brain but also with your heart. When you are done,
your project will be more than just a bunch of nicely
machined parts. It will be a work of art.

Enjoying what YOIl are doing is what it should be
all about. Scotty Hewitt s little 5" tugboat is shown
with another version ofa single cylinder oscillating
steam engille that could be considered large only
ill comparisoll to Scotty's. Plans for the larger
engine are included ill Section 5 so you can begin
having fun with your tabletop machine tools.
Think about this. When this building was completed
but not ready to move into the payments for all three
buildings came up to $85 an hour, 24 hours a day
and 7 days a week. I didn't want to turn the old
buildings over to a Realtor because I believed I could
sell them myself quicker and save the commission
that would amount to many thousands of dollars. I
was turning down at least two Realtors a week who
all told me they had a potential buyer if I would sign
up with them. If you didn't think it took a lot of
balls to stand finn you must have a hell of a lot more
money than I did. Fortunately I was right and leased
both buildings with an option to buy in four months.
I was also spending thousands of dollars to move
into the new building at the same time. I'm
somewhat broke now but the main thing for me is I
did it on my own again.
As flook back on my life now I realize that I was
the happiest when I got into deals like this when I

The end of a journey

At 66, for the first time in my life I feel like I have
finished what I started. I'm a self-taught man who
started with nothing and now owns a beautiful
manufacturing facility that is worth several million
dollars. If I died tomorrow the company will be left
in good shape and will have the organization to
continue to give our customers good service. The
equipment and inventory is completely paid for and
I have passed on the skills to keep the business
running smoothly. I never screwed anyone to get to
this point and always paid my bills on time. The
only money that I really risked was my own and
only invested it in my own ideas. I still enjoy working
with new ideas but I know that I no longer plan to
get myself into a position where there is a great deal
of risk. There is just too much to lose now.
Employees, customers, dealers and suppliers all have
to enter into the equation. It's no longer a one-man
show, and it's time for me to kick back and just enjoy
what I've created.
"Al'l is nol a fhing, il is a \1'(9". ..

- Elbert Hubbard

The media seems to enjoy portraying modelers as meek lillie people sitting
at home and never venturing far from their desk or workbench. Joe Martin
belies this image. In business or pleasure, Joe has alwaysfollnd a challenge
ill putting his skills to the test, whether it is building a business, sailing,
flying RIC models or racing fast machines.

Top left: Joe windslllfillg at Lake Lopez. Joe is all experienced windsurfer, having speed·sailed at "The
Ponds", a high willd spot in the California desert (which has since beel/fenced off), and surFsailed in
Sduthern California and Maui, Hawaii. Above: Joe:~forlller Erickson 32 ocean racer;n the NewporHo·
Ensellada race. Top right: Joe is shown at the helm of the Erickson. Above right: All you can see is Joe's
head sticking out of this mini version of a J2·meter yacht here being raced ill light air ill Oceanside harbOl:

It doesn't matter if the top speed is 15 knots or 185 MPH, ifit goes fast and you can get in it, Joe will put
numbers on it and go racing. Top: Joe's first venture into auto racing was a Triumph Spitfire raced in the
production classes of vintage sports car racing. Above: Joe at speed at Willow Springs Raceway in a Swift
DB-l Formula Ford. He was San Diego Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) Regional Champion in that
class in /994.

Sometimes you're just in the wrong place at the
wrong time. At an SCCA race in Holtville, CA, Joe
(#80) is caught by surprise by a spinning car that
entered the turn too fast behind him. Fortunately,
his car didn't flip, but ended up back on its wheels
with a badly damaged suspension.

lEGION 4- Other Machining Topia

(hapter 6 - (N( in the home shop
Aquick history 01 eNe

looked into the control enclosure. I'm sure hi s or her
first comment would be "i mpossible."

I have been personally involved with CNC si nce the
early seventies and soon realized this was the way to
make things. Back then all sorts of ideas were being
tried to simplify the mass production of machined parts.
Many manufacturers were using hydraulic power and
came up with some interesting systems. They were called
NC (numerical control) machines because the storage
device was a one-inch wide paper tape. The method of
choice before NC was a system that duplicated parts
by tracing them with a hydraulic mechanism controlled
by a really neal valve that was controlled by a sty lus

I thought I bought a telephone company
My first machine that was controlled by DC motors
turned out to be a disaster. I bought it used, and it had a
stack of manuals 18 inches high. I never dreamed I was
going to look at every page but I did. When I opened
the control and looked inside I thought I had bought a
telephone company. I believe there were 120 individual
circuit boards and thousands of individual transistors. It
was manufactured by Edlund. We used to call it a
"Deadlund." I wasted more time and money on that
machine than I care to admit, and I felt relived as it was
loaded on a tlUck for its finaljoumey to the junk yard.
Problems with no memory storage
The way this machine stored memory was interesti ng.
At this time there weren't any memory storage devices
invented for commercial use. What this control did was
feed a single block of code into a very long piece of
NiChrome wire. (A block of code contained the
instructions the machine needed to make a single move.)
The high resistance of the wire would delay the signal
long enough so the signal could be amplified at the other
end and se nt back on the sa me wire without
interference. The signal would then bounce back and
forth until the machine had moved to a location that
corresponded to that block of code.

that the operator would move like a probe and the

machine would duplicate his movements. Gigantic
machines were built around thi s idea for the aircraft
industry.

Hydraulic eNe systems?
It was only natural that this was the group of
manufacturers would be the first to try this new field,

and did they ever come up with some weird systems!
You also have to realize that electronics were pretty
crude during that same time period. My first NC
machine was a Cinematic manufactured by Cincinnati
machine tool. It had ball lead screws driven by hydraulic
motors and was fairly reliable and quite popular at the
time. Tool changers were still in their infancy. I ran it
until it was so out-dated that I gave it away even though
it still ran. Another interesting point is this machine had a
"wire wrapped" control with few circuit boards. If a
recent graduate of electronic engineering had ever

Sometimes I can be persistently stupid
New machines were thousands of dollars more than I
could afford and not that reliable either. I remember a
friend who had a three year old machine that cost over
$100,000 that needed service. The first thing the
technician said was, "I didn' t think they had any of these
old bastards still running." You can imagine how my friend
felt when he made that $2500 payment each month.
You think I would have learned by then, but I can be
persistently stupid at times. My next di saster was a
MOOG milling machine. It used a Bridgeport base and
didn ' t have leadscrews. It was entirely controlled by
hydraulics. Movement was controlled by thin plates that
moved with the machine slides with accurate holes
located at every inch. Pins about 0.187" (5mm) in
diameter would engage the proper hole and then another
plate with holes spaced at 0.200" would come into play.
The last 0.200" relied on a single tum of a leadscrew.
The machine finally anived at a position within a 0.00 1"

Designedfor prodllctiolljobs, these two Bridgeport
Te3's are relatively compact bllt cost about $50,000
each and fit into the third category above.
309

of accuracy. I didn't realize it when I bought it, but I
was horrified to find that this mother worked like a player
piano. The one-inch wide paper tape wasn't read with
switching devices like other machines. It actually was
more like a valve that allowed or prevented air from
getting to cylinders that controlled hydraulic valves.
When it read a block of tape (around 10 lines of holes
of8 holes each) the SOB sounded like a steam engine.
I chalked that one off to having more balls than brains;
however, we actually made more parts with it than we
did with the Deadlund.
It should also be noted that I'm sure that these early
NC machines were the best that could be designed with
what was available, and the solutions they came up with
were quite ingenious at the time. I'm looking back at it
from a slightly humorous position and in no way mean
to infer that the designers of that era weren't up to the
task. They just didn't have the tools to work with that
we do today.

The course is set
At this time, NC machines could only cut straight paths,
and as soon as the electronics were available to store
just a small amount of memory the new rage became
"look-ahead" control systems. This meant the cutting
tools wouldn't hesitate as the next block of information
was read and create machining problems. Stepper
motors were used for a short period to drive the leadscrews; however, within a few short years the entire
industry switched to DC motors. Encoders or resolvers
were used to keep track of position. The DC motors
were controlled by fast computers. Working in unison
with accurate bailleadscrews, they created a system

that was very close to where we are today; however,
they were slower and very expensive. Today servo
drives use AC motors controlled by varying the
frequency to the windings, eliminating the brushes
needed with DC motors. The latest innovation is linear
motors that can move machine slides at incredible

speeds.

Anew way of thinking
The marvelous part of the CNC revolution wasn' t just
the fact that it was eliminating workers from sometimes
very strenuous and boring jobs; it was that there was
finally a method of cranking multiple handles in unison
todo things that the best machinist in the world couldn' t
accomplish manually. By moving screws on the X- and
Y-axes in unison, you could machine tapers. circles and.
in fact, any shape you wanted. This allowed engineers
to design parts with the shapes they wanted, not just
shapes that were possible to machine using the old
methods. Machines that had cost thousands of dollars
suddenly became scrap iron. These new CNC machines
didn't care if they were cutting a complex shape or a
straight line. Whether the tolerance was tight or not the
machine was always "right on." and the tolerances were
determined by the tools used.

Carbide insert tooling changed the entire machine
tool industry
At the same time, carbide insert tooling became
available and took over the market like a storm. I don't
think I could have ever convinced a machinist in the
fifties that some day they would be taking 0.300" cuts
on cold rolled steel at a cutting speed around 400 to
600 feet per minute (200 meters/min) using a 40
horsepower lathe at a 0.020" (.Smm) feed rate for each
revolution and that this would be done with little carbide
tools made using powered meta1 technology held in place
with little tiny screws, and they'd still get marvelous
finishes on gummy old cold rolled at the same time. Well.
they do, and we at Sherline take advantage of all these
things to give our customers a lot of "bang for the buck."
The consumers of products that are manufactured using
this technology benefit as much a<; the manufactures that
use them.
Because NC lathes could also produce these types of
moves, large and expensive form tools were on there
way out. This may not seem significant, but by generating
shapes rather than forming them, shapes could be far
more precise, and at the same time machines didn '{ have
to be so massive to prevent tools from chattering. Hand
scraped ways were replaced by ingenious frictionless
slides that lasted for years with little maintenance.

These small helical gears were cut using the X, Y
and A axis Oil a CNC Sherlille mill. The 25T alld
34T gears were cUI to Iliff .089" depth ill olle pass.
310

Because there is always the poss ibility of a crash,
machines are no longer bui lt where the headstock is an
integral part of the base casting, and in most cases they
can be realigned if one of these disastrous events should
happen.

for home use. Because of their ex perience, running a
CNC machine doesn't faze them at a)). Even the general
public has been exposed to CNC through televi sion
shows, and many people have a basic understanding
that many of the products they use are now made by
computer controlled machines, although they might think
it is a much eas ier process than it really is. When these
people, be they jewelers, gunsmiths or hobbyists need
parts, many of them hope to be able to take advantage
of the availability of low cost CNC systems to help them
make the parts they need. To satisfy the demands of
both the experienced, compu ter-savvy machin ist and
the neophyte who wants to learn to make parts using
computer control, a number of compan ies including
Sherline now offer complete turnkey CNC machining
systems at prices unheard of when this book was first
written in 1998.

WIly I love cnc robots
In closing this section, I firmly believe that these machines
that we call CNC are the robots of the future and I truly
love them. They have allowed me, Joe Martin the
designer, to design the parts that I've always wanted to
design without dumping my problems on Joe Martin
the machi ni st, who must produce parts for Joe Martin
the businessman, who can supply you, the customer, a
fairly priced quality product. At the same time this allows
Joe Martin the owner, a reasonable profit to buy more
of these marvelous CNC machines, of course. And so
it goes.
Even though this doesn't do the subject justice, I thought
you might find these facts interesting. It's always wise
to see at least a brief history on a subject before
becoming part of it.

Are you ready for a (omputer (ontrolled ma(hine?
On page I of this book I compare the experience of
production machining on large, expensive CNC
machines to that of a merchant seaman who has spent
his life aboard large ships on the oceans of the world.
My comparison is to a sailor in a small boat who is
representing the hobbyist starting out with manua1 tools.
This explain s why I bel ieve you should first learn the
rules ofcuning metal with manua1 machines. On the other
hand , I believe it is always helpful to know something
about the CNC machines I love.
If this is the first time you are reading about machining,
you are probably wondering how useful CNC machine
tools wou ld be to a hobby ist and whether manual
machines are becoming obsolete in the age ofcomputers.
There are no simple rules to an swer these question s,
because the uses for the machines and the indi vidual 's
background are such a major consideration in the
answer. I can tell you that if you don't know how to use
computers or how to operate machine tools, your
chances of success in CNC are small. It's just too
complicated to learn how to do both at the same time.
You have to know how metal cuts before you can write
instructions (the program) on how to make a part.
Four dasses of (N( machine,

(N( moves from industry to the Home Shop
Anyone now thinking of working as a machinist in an
industrialized country would have to expect to learn how
to operate CNC machinery in order to be able to earn
a decent wage. This has been the trend since the 1980's,
and there is now an ever-grow ing pool of people for
whom CNC machining is a simple fact of life. As they
transition fro m the production shop to their home shop,
they are now finding that both the size and priceofCNC
systems have dropped tothe point were they are suitable

. ~

\~. i

but fewer choices for the home hobbyist

•

From hereon I' m going to stick with people who are
machining for the fun of it. Let's first think about the
type ofCNC machines available.
I) Simple add-ons that use a PC computer are
available for machines from as small as a Sherline
up to full-size machines. These inexpensive systems
use stepper motors to dri ve the threaded leadscrews

Tum -key benchtop 4-axi5 lIIill CNC ~)'stems like this
one that include even the computer with .'iO!t\Vare
already insta l/ed are now a vailable for ullder
$3000.00. They are ready to plug ill alld lise.
311

of 5 HP spindle drives and have ground ball
leadscrews that can't be driven manually. Cost for
a new machine is in the $50,000 range for either
the mill or lathe. These are the machines that allow
new businesses to be competitive and may even
find a use in a home business operated in a garage
using a converter to create 3·phase current. (Power
companies usually only offer 3·phase current in
industria1 areas.)

and usually don't have ballieadscrews. This is an
inexpensive way to get CNC control. Costs start at
less than $2,500 for the control only for bench type
machines. These are the machines on which
hobbyists usually stan CNC machining.
The next step up is adding an encoder. The
advantage of this type of system is that when a signa1
is sent to a stepper motor, without an encoder you
have to assume the motor moved, and with an
encoder you know it moved; however, it has little
advantage over a properly used stepper system
when it comes to accuracy. (See photos page 37.)
2) These are fairly sophisticated machines without
tool changers used by toolmakers and a1so as simple
production machines. Professional systems used to
use DC motors until recently but now use AC
motors. These systems can cut contours at over
100 inches per minute. A vertical mill that can be
run in either the CNC or manual mode is a very
useful tool for a modem toolmaker. Costs are
around $20,000 for a mill or $30,000 for a lathe.
Don ' t buy a used CNC machine until you are
(X)Sitive you can get them serviced loca1ly. You can't
afford to pay huge travel expenses to fix an
inexpensive problem. (See photos on pages 38 and
291.)
3) Machines in thi s category are designed to run
production jobs. They have tool changers, cutting
tool s that are flooded with coolant and enclosures
to contain the chips and coolant. They are a lot more
complex, use three·phase current with a minimum

4) This last category represents the hUe workhorses
of the machining industry. They are designed to run
24 hours a day and operate for years without
problems. They are also very expensive. These are
not tool s a hobbyist should consider purchasing.
Thi s is the type of equipment I own, and most
individuals wouldn't have the time and money to
keep it operating properly. Service starts at $ 100+
an hour and replacement parts cost about fiv e to
ten times more than you'll think they are worth.

Costs start around $1 00,000. (See photo page 290.)
What can you do with an inexpensive eNe system?
You have to be realistic as to what an inexpensiveCNC
machine tool can do. There are some amazingly good
systems available for under $3000, but they can't
compare with a full-blown CNC machine. The big
difference is the ballleadscrews. These are very precise
and expensive. The cost starts at $1000 per axis and
they are much too large to use on small machines. Don't
get me wrong and think that I don't find these
inexpensive control systems useful , but at 10% of the
cost, don ' t expect them to perform like their larger
counterparts. Don ' t be disappointed by what these
machines can't do. Be happy with the fact that they
now can do machining jobs that would have been
considered impossible thirty years ago on machines
costing many thousands of dollars.
Consider millin g a rectangular ~
protrusion on a block that must have
'-........ ~ -'
accurately radiused comers. A simple
CNC program will cut the comers precisely
with very little code. To do the same task with a
manual machine would involve cutting the protrusion
and then putting the radius on each comer one at a time
using a rotary table. This is why they used to manufacture
rotary tables with an X-Y slide fitted to the bottom of it.
Believe me, this wasn't something you could use after
you had just one beer. It took 100% of your attention.
Another good example would be milling and counterboring a large hole through a plate. A simple program
could be written that could cut this hole, and it could be

A driver box like this Sherline PIN 8760 4·axis box
makes it possible to drive stepper motors from any
PC computer. Cables plug into the X. Y. Z and A
axis stepper motors. A 25·pin cable goes to the
computer:\" parallel port. A power supply is included.
3t2

102- RO.2SCO

done with an end mill. The expensive ballieadscrew
machines cut these holes almost perfectly round. The
smaller machines I' m referring to in this paragraph can
do the job but the hole will not be as perfect; however,
it is usually acceptable. To use a manual machine it would
take a rotary table or many passes with a boring head.

Il - RO.:lOOO

H -')-- - -

Codes for CNC machining
The standard programming systems avail able to
hobbyists use "G" and "M" codes. The "G" defines the
type of movement, and "M" controls the systems
available. Asan example "GOO X- I.OOO M03" is telling
the machine to move rapidl y I inch on the X-axis in a
minus direction and tum the spindle on. This would
position the cutter at the edge of the part, and the next
line of code may read, "GO I X-2.000 FlO MOS." The
GO I will use the FlO to detennine that the table should
now move to the new J,Xlsition X-2.000 at a programmed
feed rate of 10 inches per minute and the M08 will tum
the coolant pump on. Once the cut has been made, the
table can be moved to its home position with the lineof
O
code, "GO X2.000 MOS M09." This means that the
table will rapidly travel to home J,Xlsition (The starting
point of every program) and tum offthe coolant and
spindle.
This should give you a general idea of how programs
are written, but remember that they can get complicated
very quickly. If this were a milling program, the Z-axis
would have to be considered. If a radius or arc had to
be programmed, the starting points and the finishing
points in " 1" and "1" values have to be entered. CNC
machines have to be programmed to make every move,
and it 's amazing how hard they will try to carry out a
programming error, even if it means self-destruction.
The last thing I'd like to mention on thi s subject is that
when I purchase a new CNC production machine, I
find it takes anywhere from six months to a year before
I believe we are using the machine to its full potenti al.
Remember that skilled people are learning to operate
the CNC control and producing work at the same time.
Despite the high price, these machines usually come with
hundreds of pages of poorly written, out of date
instructions. This is one area where consumer level CNC
products often outperfonn their big brothers
Generating the G-codc fo r a complicated part
For.simple pockets, hole patterns and regular geomeUic
shapes, G-code is usually written directly. Running it in
a "backplot" program confinns that you have written it
correctly before you run the part. For complicated 3D
shapes, writing code for thelool path by hand would
be imposs ibl e. In these applications, the part is first

2.0000

( PUltl'~' pru).:r:trll l

gllll g-lll ).:911 xII

~

I I.U

x-.:;UII
g-l l <II

~'5I1U

1,;UI ~·U fl2
g02 x- 1.11112:;

).:111
).:02
).:111
).:02

~· -.-I9(d j·SUUjU
x-.' .II.' IJ ~· - . 2-1lin
x-.'-II.' 1.1 ~·.2-1KII i.n.' 1-' j.2-11i1l
x- 1.0112S ~A9(j 1
x· 5011 ~' n Uj(.2S j . .-I9(, I

).:111 ~· ••2:;1I
).:011 g-lO xII

xn xl
?,

All example ofG-code. Shown above is the drawing
for a pulley shaped path along with the G-code that
will generate that tool path. A complete explanation
of the math to generate these numbers as well as
other examples call be found Oil the Sherline web
site. The " %" sign starts alld ends the program.

drawn in a CAD program and saved in .dxf or .sl1 format.
Then the file is run through a second translator program
that converts the draw ing data into a G-code text fi le.
This file is entered into your control computer's software
and run. Most high quality CAD/CAM programs can
output G-code directly from your drawing. If you would
like to learn more about understanding and writing Gcode, you can download the instructions I wrote which
are posted on Sherline's web site at www.sherline.coml
CNCinstructions.htm

Prices keep coming down ...
There are several fac tors that have reduced prices: I)
Computers themselves continue to become both more
powerful and less costly, 2) Stepper and servo motors
are readily available at reasonable prices, 3) While
expensive professional level CAD/CAM programs have
become more capable, so have inexpensive and even
free programs grown in number and sophistication and
4) highly capable open source operati ng systems and
software like Linux and EMC have made it possible to
drive sophisticated CNC systems without pay ing one
cent to Bill Gates. As of2004-all the following prices
in thi s CNC section are based on 2004 prices-it is
possible to buy a benchtop 4-ax is CNC milling system
313

seny? the stepper motor causes it to move 1.8 0 or II
200 of a revolution. Half-stepping or micro-stepping
can increase the number of divisions to 400 divisions.

G-tode List
g58 use preset work (oordinate system 5
959 use preset work (oordinatl syslem 6
g59.111111 pI,III.ark toOldinate system 7
92 (il(ulol/heilca l Inlcrpo lation
(d ockwise)
gS9.2use ~reset w (oordinote system8
ork
gS9.3use ~reset work (OOrdinote system 9
gl tilCulor/hclicol inlcrpololion
g80 (cn(el molicn mode (indudes (anned)
(counte rclockwise)
g81 drilling (on ned cytle
94 dwell
910 coordinate syslem origin selling
g82 drilling with d",11 (anned cytle
g83 (hip· breaking drilling (on ned !'f{le
917 ~y plane sclcc'ion
918 II plane selcdi on
g84 right hand topping ronned cytle
g85 bating, no dwell, feed out (on ned cytle
919,1 plane !election
g86 baring, spindle stop, rapid out (onned
920 inch syslcm sclcc,ion
911 miliimelcr system lelcclion
g87 bark baring conned qdl
940 cancel (u ller diamc lcr compens ation g88 baring, spindil itop, manual out (anned
94 1 Itart Mlcf diarnelcf compo lef!
gl31 boring, dwell, feed out (onned <yde
942 slort (uttCI diomelcr comporight
990 oblolute distonte made
991 incremental dillon!e made
g43 tool length offset (plul)
g92 ollsat (oordinot8lystems
g49 (OfKel.oollength oillel
g92.2 (an(el offset (OOrdinote systems
g53 motion in modline cOOldinole 1)'Sll!m
¢4 use prml work (oordinole system 1
99] inYtrse time leed mode
g55 1M prr\l!l work (oordinole Iyslem 2
g941eed per minute mode
g98 initiol level return in (OMed !'f{les
956 1M prrwl work (oordino.e l)'tlem3
gO rapid pose' loning
91 linear interpolation

When using a leadscrew with 20 TPI (0.050" pitch)

that means that each step resolves to .ooo 125" or just
over one ten-thousandths of an inch. These motors work
very well and are capable of making very accurate
movements wi thout stalling as long as they are not
overloaded. Stepper-motors have more power at
slower feed rates because the length of the power pulse
is longer. If a stepper-motor is overloaded due to any
number of reasons, the motor may skip one or more
steps. What makes this a disaster is that the error is
camed forward because the home position has changed.
In an "open loop" system, there is no cross-check
between the signal sent to the motor and the amount it
actually moved.
In order to have a "closed loop" system that compares
intended movement to actual movement you need to
include an encoder on the motor shaft that measures its
movement. In this case, DC servo motors are usually
used. The encoder translates a distance dimension into
rotation and keeps track of shaft rotation to stop the
motor exactly when it reaches the intended distance. If
the motor is overloaded the encoder will keep applying
power until the intended distance is achieved. The
disadvantage for the home-shop machinist is higher initial
cost and more complexities to the overall system.

957 use presti ..ork coordinule system 4

M-tode List
10\0 program stop
Ml optional program stap
M2 program end
M.3 turn spindle dOl:kwisa
M4 turn spindle rounterdOl:kwise
MSltop spindle turning
M6 tool <hange
In milt (OOlont on

M81100d (OalOnl on
M9 misl and Hood (OOIOnl all
M26 enable autamatk b·am damping
M27 disable automatic b·a!is damping
M30 progrom end, poller shunle, and reset
M48 enable spetel ond feed O"I8Irides
M49 diSllble speed and feed overrides
M60 paller shuttle and program stop

Listed above are the meanings of the various Gand M-Codes you might encou1ller. Only the ones
highlighted in bold, red type would be needed by
someone using a bench top CNC system.

that sells for under $3000.00. This price not only includes
the milling machine, stepper motors, drivers and rotary
table, it also includes the computer, operating system
and 4-axis software to run it.

What's next lor the home shop
Home shop tool trends seem to follow what is available
in the professional shop. Adjustable "zero" handwheels.
digital readouts. inserted tip carbide cutters and other
items developed for the professional machinist rapidly
trickled down to the home shop user. CNC is following
this trend and will no doubt become more and more
prevalent in the home shop. Despite its increasing
presence, however, it is unlikely to ever totally replace
manual machining. Simple jobs like drilling a hole or
milling a single slot can still be done more quickly on a
manual machine. and basic training should be obtained
on manual machines so that machinists gain a feel for
what are reasonable speeds and feed rates so they can
properly program their CNC machines. CNC tools may
make multiple parts faster and can machine threedimensional surfaces impossible to do by hand, but there
will always be jobs for manual machines and machinists
who prefer to turn the handwheels for themselves rather
than sitting at a computer writing code.

••• but things didn't get any easier
Lower prices have brought the expectation that because
it costs less it must also have gotten easier, but this is
not the case. Most manufacturers assume a certain level
of computer and machining knowledge on the part of
the buyer, and if you don't have it. you are in for a steep
learning curve. In fact, having a computer and stepper
motors drive your machine to make your part for you
adds another level of complication to an already
substantial task. Now, in addition to understanding how
to hold the work, what tool to use to cut it, what order
in which to make the cuts, how much to take off with
each cut and so on, you must also learn the language to
tell the computer to do all these things for you.

Stepper motors vs. servo motors
and lIopen loop" vs. lIc10sed loop" systems
Stepper motors divide one rotation of the motor shaft
into steps, usually 200 per revolution. Each step signal
314

SECTION 5-PROJECTS AND RESOURCES
Craftsman Profile-Bob Breslauer ............. . ...... . . . . . 3 16

Tips for Machinists ........... . .................. ... .... 318
1. Plans and projects for you to build ....................... 319
1. Tap Handle ... a beginning project (0 use in your shop .... 32 1
2. Mill vise "soft" jaws .. .a simple project that uses
both a lathe and mill .. .... .................. 325

3. Laying out a circular hole pattern for drilling .......... 327
4. "Millie" ... a small oscillati ng steam engine by
Ed Warren from Modeltee magazine ............ 329
5. Ordering plans for the "Little Angel", a

"hit-n-miss" engine by Bob Shores ...... .. ..... 333
2. Shows and awards for machinists ................. . . ..... 335

3. Exploded views and part number listings ......•. . . • . .. ..... 339
• Lathe .. ............................. .. . ...... 340
• Vertical milling machine . . . . . .......... • .. . . . .... . 341
• 8-direction mill . ............................... 342
• Part number listing .............................. 343
4. A simple RPM gage .............. . ................... 345

Bob Breslauer produced this
professional looking jig for
holding brass tubing to accurately
solder miniature Harley Davidson
frames. He even machined both the
fixture plate as well as the strap
clamps.

Here is one offive finished Harley
frames mounted to a Sherlille
looling plate. More all Bob alld
his progression from part-time
modeler to full-time professional
museum mode/maker can befOll1ld
Ofl the next two pages.
315

Craftsman Profile by Craig libuse

BOB BRESLAUER••• a hobby turns into a profession

Custom Harley Davidson
front fork and disk brake
details. The love of making
models like this led Bob to a
new career.

n 1988, Bob Breslauer had a lot of time on his
hands. His wife worked for United Airlines and
he was a professional musician, but the arrival of a
new baby meant that somebody had to be home
during the day. His wife's schedule was not flexible,
so Bob took ajob asa bridge tender on the midnight
shift in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, raising a
drawbridge so ships and sailboats could move up
and down the Intercoastal Waterway. Ship traffic is
light in the middle of the night, so he had a lot of
time with nothing to do.
About that time he happened to walk into Orange
Blossom Hobbies in Miami looking for a plastic
model kit to build to fill the long hours. There he
saw a display of beautiful metal car parts made by
Augie Hiscano. He was fascinated by their detail,
quality and small size and decided right then and
there that he wanted to be able to make parts like
that. He has the "smaller is better" fascination with
detail shared by many modelers and believes that if
detailed part is good, a part that is just as detailed
but half the size is twice as good. He bought a
Sherline lathe and mill and was allowed to set them
up on the job. Whenever the bridge didn't need to
be raised, he would crank out miniature race car
model parts all night long.

I

His skill grew as the parts he made became more
and more sophisticated. Eventually the skills he
obtained making model cars on the midnight shift
bridge tender'sjob led to a position as a modelmaker
in the Gallery of Transportation Museum in Coral
Gables, Florida where he now has a "Disneyland of
tools" to work with. From EDM to eNe, their fully
equipped shop has it alL It is a modeler's and tool
lover's paradise. He now works full time making
models for the museum, most of his time being
devoted to making Gauge 1 locomotives for their
collection. In less than 10 years, Bob turned a part
time hobby and a love of making model race cars
into a full time profession in modelmaking.

A 1143 scale wire wheel of incredible detail for its
tiny size.
3 16

Projects: Ferrari Formula I engine and car

This JI12 scale engine and transmission
are modeled after Ayrton Senna 's 1990
FJ90 Formula I Ferrari. The major

blocks are cast in resin. Over 1500 hand
made metal parts make lip the details.

This sprint car hub is typical
of the fine quality found
throughout Bob's models.

(Above) The components 10 make this
sprint car are all scratch built including

the wire wheels. Below is the finished
car on display.

The wheels for this
1/12 scale model of

lady Scheckter's
Ferrari 312-T4
Formula I car are
made in multiple
pieces just like the
prototype.
317

Tips for Machinists
With experience, craftsmen often discover ways to

make things better, faster or easier. Fortunately,
some of them have taken the time to pass on their
knowledge to help save all of us some time and
trouble. Here are a few suggestions that might make
working with your tools a bit more fun.
DRAWBOLT WASHER RETAINER-Steven Smith
WASHER
Here's a simple and
good-looking way to
HEAT-SHRINK
TUBING
keep a drawbolt and
washer together.

Mr. Smith of San Mateo,
California notes that when
you lift a drawbolt out of
the mill spindle. the washer can easily slide down
the bolt and fall off. The bolt and washer can also
become separated while rolling around in your
toolbox. A short length ofheat-shrink tubing slipped
over the bolt shaft will keep the washer iri place.

(ENTERING WORK IN A 4·JAW (HU(K
-Edward Ewell, Klamath Falls, Oregon
If you have the 3/8" insert tool holder (PIN 7600).
the 3/8" hole in this holder will hold a one-inch travel
dial indicator nicely. Mr. Ewell uses this to center
his work in the 4-jaw chuck. After centering, he
removes the dial indicator and installs the cutting
tool and positions the holder for the cutting process.
He makes camera repair parts and says the accuracy
he needs can only be obtained with the 4-jaw chuck.

Another good tip from Edward Ewell on using
magnetic indicator stands...
Many components on Sherline lathes and mills are
aluminum which is nonmagnetic. In order to be able
to use indicators with magnetic bases, Mr. Ewell
mounted his Sherline lathe and milling machine on
a l /S" steel plate to allow the use of magnetic dial
indictor stands. This goes on top of the nonnal
mounting board. With this setup you can indicate
your work from either side of the machine. If you
don't have a single plate large enough to cover your
entire base, you can just screw down a couple of
smaller plates in the appropriate areas on your base
where you will be using your magnetic indicators.

NEW GREASE IMPROVES MA(HINE PERFORMAN(E
-Henry Scherer, Suisun, California
Mr. Scherer purchased a small canister of Mobil 1®
synthetic grease at an auto parts store. When he put
it on the slides and leadscrews of his machines he
noticed an immediate improvement in perfonnance.
Since he passed on this tip, all new Sherline
machines now go out of the factory with a similar
Teflon-based grease. It really does work better.

#0 MORSE TAPER HOLDER FOR A #1 (ENTER DRILL
-Ross Heill, Saskatchewan, Canada
At work, Ross Heitt runs 30" manual and CNC
machines for a Canadian gear manufacturer, but at
home he works on miniature machine tools. One of
his first projects when he got his new lathe was to
make a center drill holder to see how well it could
tum a Morse taper. It worked fine, and he finds his
center drill holder a very convenient fixture. This
one is sized to hold a #1 center drill and fits a
tailstock with a #0 Morse taper. For your own
infonnation, a Morse taper is based on a taper of
approximately 5/S" per foot.

,.b.

10-32 SET
SCREW - - .

Mr. Ewell's setup with the dial indicator being held

in the 318" hole of the PIN 7600 toolpost.

10·32 SET SCREW

3 18

This holder was turned from
5/8· diameter 12114 steel and
has a .188" hole for 0 #1 (enter
drill. The #0 Morse taper starts
at 0 size of .361/.362" and
tapers to .319" over 0 distan(e
of .846". The overoillength of
the port is 1.9· ond the body
portion is .95" long.

SECTION 5-Projern and Resource,

Chapter I-Plans for proiects you can build
Putting your machines to work
Now that you've read about cutting metal and seen
some of the projects that experienced craftsmen have

built, you probably want to make something
yourself. Depending on your level of expertise (and
sense of adventure), I have provided some sample

projects that vary from fairly simple to quite
complex. If you have never made a metal project
before, I suggest you start with one of the first two
to get a feel for how metal cuts. One thing that will

quickly discourage a new metalworker is starting
on a project that is too complex.

The projects
Tap Handle
This lathe project
requires little raw
materials and a few
basic operations like

Laying out a 6-hole or
8-hole pattern
An indexing head or
rotary table can make it
easy to layout complex
hole patterns. but more
often than not, the parts
you will make will require
simple patterns. Though I hesitate to use the word
"trigonometry" for fear of turning you off before we even
get started, this project will show you how easy it is to
"trig out" a simple hole pattern so that you can dial in
the hole centers with your handwheels. It's more accurate
than working to scribed lines and requires nothing more
than some simple calculations.

A little steam engine
named "Millie"
ModeLte c magazine
published an article by
Ed Warren on how to
build a simple steam
engine. It is a great
starter project that is
sized just right for
tabletop machine tools.
The magazine and Ed
have kindly given theirpennission to reprint the article
here for your enjoyment.

turning tapers. drilling
holes and tapping a thread. You will end up with a
nice little tap handle that will come in handy for
future miniature projects.

Soft J a ws for your
m ill vise
The jaws that come
with a mill vise are
made from steel.
When holding parts
that
have
been
machined , they can
damage the surface
finish. For holding soft or finished parts finnly, you
can make a set of aluminum "soft" jaws to replace
the standard jaws. This project is good practice for
learning to use a mill , plus you'll end up with a
custom set of jaws that can be used on future
projects.

" In venting is a cO/l/bination of braillS
and /l/aterials. The IIlOre bra ins YOllllse,
rite less material YO II I/eed. "

Young C. Park ofHawaii scratch-built this 1116 scale
aLuminum cutaway modeL of an F4U-ID Corsair
from photos and undimensioned drawings found in
WW/J aircraft maintenance manuals.

-Charles F. Kettering

319

Purchasing plans for the Little A ngel hit ' n miss
and other engines by Bob Shores
The Little Angel is a gas powered hit 'n miss engine.
Making a running engine is quite a test of machining
skill, but when you're ready to take it on, thi s project is
well designed and the plans are very complete.
Hundreds of them have been built by craftsmen allover
the world. It is sized for tabletop machine tools. If you
can build this and get it to run, you can definitely call
yourself a machinist.

that sell metal in a good selection of sizes and with no
minimum quantities orcutting charges are:
ASAP Source-284 S. Industrial Hwy .• Ann Arbor,
MI 48104 Phone (734) 213-2727
E-mail: sales@asapsource.com
Web site: www.asapsource.com.
Metal by the foot, Inc" 2700 E. Truman Road,
Kansas City, MO 64127. Phone: (816) 241-5550.

Onlinemetals.com-Seanle, WA. Order online or call
(800) 704-2157 or (206) 285-8603.
E-mail: sales@onlinemeta1s.com
Web site: www.onlinemetals.com
Small Parts, Inc.-13980 NW 58th Ct., Miami
Lakes, FL 33014-0650. Phone: (800) 220-4242 to
order or ask for their complete catalog.
Web site: www.smallparts.com.
Magazines for tabletop machinists
Here are some addresses in case you want to look further
at magazines that offer machining projects. Not all of
the projects are appropriate for tabletop size tools, but
even larger projects can always be scaled down to half
or quarter size and made to fit your tools. As I've noted
before, this offers not only the advantage of saving on
materials, it also makes the project that much more
challenging to build and fun to look at when it's done.
The following addresses and phone numbers were
correct as of 2004. Many of these magazines are
available at the magazine racks of larger bookstores.

Bob now offers plans and casting kits for other engines
that are appropriately sized for small machine tools. The
new Hercules engine, for example, is perfect for Sherline
and similarly sized machines. For more details on how
to order, see Project 5 in thi s section.

Buildil/g this "Little AI/gel" offers quite a challenge.

Village Press publishes The Home Shop Machinist,
Machinist's Workshop and Live Steam Magazines.
Their address is: Village Press, 2779 Aero Park Drive.
Traverse City, MI, 49686. Phone: 800/ 327-7377
For those interested in internal combustion engines, an
excellent source ofinfonnation was a magazine called
Strictly I.e. Though they ceased publication a few years
ago, back issues are still available. Their address is:
Strictly I.e. Publishing, 24920 43rd Avenue South, Kent,
WA 98032-4160. E-mail: strictlyic@earthlink.netorsee
their web site at www.strictlyic.com.
England has a strong tradition in miniature model
engineering and a very good magazine called Model
Engineer that has been on the market longer than any
other such publication. They also have a companion
publication that is published several times a year called
Model Engilleer's Workshop. Contact: Model
Engineer, Nexus House, Boundary Way, Azalea Drive,
Swan ley, Kent BR8 8HU, England. Phone: 01322
660070.

Costing kits
Many castings offered in kits are of such poor quality
that you would be better off making the parts from
bar stock. The companies listed below offerconsistantly
good castings in their kits to give you a starting source.
See Sherline's "resources" web page for a current and
more complete list of sources.
PM Research Inc.- 4110Niles Hill Road, Wellsville,
NY 14895. Phone: (716)593-3169

Web site: www.pmresearch.com
MeChanical Modeis-Stirling engine kits.
Web site: www.mechanicalmodels.com
Morrison Miniature Engines-A source for high
quality Stuart steam engine kits. Call (501) 753-1749
or see www.mmmachines.com.
Metal stock and small fasteners
Buying from large industrial suppliers requires minimum
orders and cuuing charges that make them impractical
as a source for small home projects. A couple of places
3W

SECTION 5- Projects and Resources

Proied 1- Making a miniature tap handle
GeHing the most out of a small project

No book on basic machining would be complete
without plans and instructions to build a tap-holding
wrench. It was the first machining project I was
given in Cranston High School in 1951. I can still
remember my teacher's name, Mr. Charles Cutler,
so he must have made an impression on me. What I
liked about him was that he could have made a living
doing machine work and was never intimidated by
the machines around him. As a matter of fact, the
students intimidated him even less. We got our first
taste of what working was all about from him
because he ran his shop class like a business, and I
remember cutting a gear before my year in his class
was over. He was a fine teacher. I'm assuming this
may be your first project, so I'm putting a little extra
effort with these instructions to get your mind in
the right mode for making close-tolerance metal
parts. I want you to do the best possible job you can
do on this project, and don't feel you have fai led if
you don't make a good part on the first try. I didn't.
You only will have failed if you accept less than
perfection on the final product. Of course I wouldn't
want to have you spend the rest of your life building
the perfect miniature tap handle. Just don't accept a
less than perfect job by calling it a perfect one.
Always have a way of improving the next one in
your mind, and this would encompass quality,
method, and time. Strive for perfection, but have
the' common sense to realize it will only be an
abstract tenn to a good craftsman who wi ll always
know the flaw in his "perfect" job.

Thefinished miniature tap handle is shown holding
a #0-80 tap. Small taps are expensive and easily
broken if not properly held, so an acc:essory like
this is a good thing to add to your tool box. This
small tap handle is also fun to build and will give
you some good practice with several basic
machining operations.

is the same size as the one used with the products
Sherline manufactures. ffyou don't have ajewe ler's
saw, purchase one from a hobby shop along with a
couple packages of blades. These saws are
marvelous tools, and it is amazing what you can cut
with them. They are also inexpensive so you can
afford the best one available. I would also
recommend a magnifying headpiece for doing close
work like this. I don't believe it is necessary to heat
treat the steel used on an item like this, since it won ' t
be used commercially.

Making the square hole for the tap
The hardest part of the project is making a square
hole to accommodate the tap. I designed it for use
with # I 0 taps and smaller. The square hole is just
large enough to hold a # 10 tap so you can use one
as a gage when you are filing the square hole to
size. If you have never attempted to do a project
like this I would suggest practicing on a scrap piece
of metal first rather than doing a poor job on the
finished part. Make this first project perfect so you
can be proud to show it to your friends.

Why a .mall tap hand I. i. worth bUilding
To get back to the subject at hand, small taps are
very easy to break and a broken tap wi ll usually
result in a scrapped part. They also get expensive as
the size goes down so there are two good reasons
why this project is worthwhi le. Just like miniature
machine tools give you a good "feel" when making
small parts, a small tapping wrench will transmit
more information to your brain on how the tapping
process is going. All you need in the way of material
is a piece of3/8" diameter free machining (12L14)
steel about 6" long and a 10-32 socket head cap
screw (SHeS) with 3/8" of thread. I designed the
tap to be clamped using a 5/32" Allen wrench which

Making a practice hole
To practice making a square hole, machine (mill) a
piece of material .220" thick and center drill the
32t

Another view of the tap handle showing the tap
removed. The 5132" hex key is used to tighten the
socket head cap screw in the end of the handle to
hold the tap ill place. This is the same tool used to
tighten or adjust most Sherline accessories.

a job like this, and, as I keep reminding you,
"shortcuts usually end in failure". By the way, if
the part were being made in production quantities
the square hole would have been broached. This is
done with a long cutting tool that doesn't revolve
and is pushed or pulled through a predrilled hole to
generate the square hole. Broaching tools are very
expensive, but the operation itself is inexpensive.
The second choice would be electrical discharge
machining (EDM) for low quantities or tight
tolerances. The reason for this somewhat lengthy
discussion is that I'm trying to teach you the skillful
use of your hands, which can be much more difficult
to describe than the operation of a simple machine.

Making the handle

.078" hole pattern with a #0 center drill using the
calibrated handwheels. Drill through with a #60 drill
(.040" or 1mm), remembering to clear and lubricate
the drill tip every drill diameter of depth. To do your
layout lines, apply a light coat of"Dykem" or use a
felt tip marking pen to highlight the scribed lines
joining the holes together. Remember that the more
accurately you saw out the square hole the less filing
you will have to do. To accomplish this the work
has to be held in such a fashion that you can saw it
to within a few thousands of an inch. This isn't
impossible if you take the time to make a good setup.
I've never had much success using a jewelers saw
to cut an outline with the work held in a vise in a
vertical position because it is difficult to see the
work. Many times I'll use a woodworking clamp
that is clamped to the worktable or vise to hold a
part while I saw it. It is imperative that the work is
held square to its surroundings in order to easily
line up the saw and cut squarely. Thread the saw
blade through the predrilled holes and clamp the
blade to the jeweler's saw body. Carefully follow
the scribed line with the saw until the next hole is
reached. You may have to reclamp the part for each
leg of the cut. Be sure you don't hold the saw out of
square and take too much material off the bottom
where you can't see the path of the saw blade. On
the other hand, trying to leave material purposely
will result in a part that is difficult to file. Filing the
hole to its final size also requires the same clamping
procedures. I used a square.needle file for this. Don't
put the file in the hole and believe by simply moving
it you will end up with a perfectly square hole. Each
pass of the file should be planned to cut a particular
spot. Therefore, each pass must be properly aligned
before moving the file. This is the fastest way to do

If you are satisfied with your first square hole, you
are either starting off with more natural skill than I
had or you are not as fussy. Whatever the case may
be it is time to make some chips, but study the
drawing one more time before starting. Clamp the
3/8" material in a 3-jaw chuck with 1/2" protruding
and face the end off. Move it out so it can be cut to
length with an allowance for finishing (3.03"). Turn
it over and face the unfinished end and reclamp it
with 2" protruding. Center drill the end with a #2
center drill. Drill a 5/32" hole exactly 1-112" deep.
Counterbore with a 1/4" drill .225" deep. Use a
10-32 spiral point tap and have the tap go in at least
.6" deep.

Tum the entire length down to .360" making sure
you get a good finish on the ~ " section close to the
chuck. Remove the alignment key under the
headstock and rotate the headstock counterclockwise
3 degrees. Mark the bar 1.205" from the end with
the turning tool. Set the tool so the cutting edge is at
approximately the same angle as the drawing. This
isn't too critical and only affects the appearance of
your cut. Take a couple of cuts to get the angle set
correctly. This is sort of a trial and error method
and you can use the point of your tool to help control
the movements by having the tool against the part
when the headstock is loosened. Remember the pivot
center is from the center of the headstock, not the
part itself; therefore you can't simply dial in the
change you want. Be sure the small end doesn 't go
undersize because the wall thickness will suffer and
make the part weak. Leave the angle set in the
headstock and, with the spindle turning around 400
RPM, take a couple of passes with a flat single-cut
mill file, being sure you don't let it load up. Radius
322

HANDLE
t---1.500

I

'

J= I

I "

DRILL 5/32 ' DIA. HOLE 1.5 ' DEEP
NOTE,
(DRILLING DEEPER \JILL HIT ' V' ON OPPOSITE

,0.360

0,. *i!::=-j

". ) ~if
10

\

0'

33'

-:::::::.-

---'

(
'
~

N

~

.078

.---...............

1,.,."'-------

,7-

y..
,O~lSOlT!

.078

0375Jl

1r"J~

m.

__

........

,//1

..//

-'~

.125 • £1.
f

10-32 SHes

MODIFIED

L

62

r=i

-

'128J7

~
I

..--[

45 '

HAND FILE

----j
0.675

5

f G

90

0.125

~--E~~'~

r:::

A

0.245

---i J J I

[

.216

~

0063
-----+.

0.155

=-~=---r 0.156

ALIGNMENT PIN

\

\\~20 7-~::::.ill /
7
J"
"'-,

.200

0.063

1//r;;0590~
/

0.225

___

'""

.....----.-.

SIDE AND RESULT IN A SCRAPPED PART)

COUNTER BORE 1/4" .225 ' DEEP
TAP 10-32 X ,60 DEEP

t-- 0.100

0i-----==J~
0.124

0.200

I
~0.20~

1/16' ntA
.3 " DEEP

.156
1/16" IJEEP HOLE

FOR SOLDERING

CLAMP

RETRACT PIN

ACTUAL SIZE

0.220

1
-----------

I: i-(s:=----:--:=ft-------fIEF~+--i~- --~---

~

--rr:;- -."

'_+

, ,

L __ ,

-------qT'-=
--=- ,• , --eJ,-'

---B

~

[s;::::::t:-::::~[]JL __,1-----------I
---- 'c ___
___~ ~

----

MINIA TURE TAP HAND LE

the edge with a file to a .020" radius. Polish both
the tapered and straight cut with 3~0 wet/dry
sandpaper using a light oil or kerosene as a lubricant.
We want this to be pretty so do a good job. Now
tum the part over in the chuck and hold it on the
.360" diameter you have already turned. By leaving
the angle set in the headstock you can now cut
exactly the same angle on the opposite side. Tum
the taper, polish the surface and you're done with
the lathe work on the handle.
Turning the small pins
Replace the alignment key under the headstock so
that you can make the alignment and retract pins.
Before starting them, read again what I wrote about
"turning small diameters" on page 135. These parts
are sized appropriately for that technique.

Making the damping pin
Take a piece of3/8" stock about 1.5" long and clamp
it in the mill vise at a 45 degree angle. Mount the
mill vise on the milling machine. Using an end mill,
cut the "Y" slot on the end of the bar-stock. One
side of the "Y" will be produced with the side of the
end mill and the opposite side will be produced with
the end of the end mill. Adjust the cutter and table
position so the center of the "V" is cut on the exact
center of the bar stock. By cutting the "V" first you
can get to center by trial and error without risking a
completed part. Now clamp this part in the 3-jaw
chuck on the lathe with "Y" protruding 1.1". Tum
this diameter down to .155" for 1" in length using
the method you just learned making the pins. Cut it
off to the proper length. Drill the 1116" hole on the
opposite end.
Modifying the socket head cap screw
The last lathe job to do on the project is modifying
the socket head cap screw (SHCS) to drive the
clamping and retract pins. Make sure the screw isn't
hardened and can be machined. The SHCS doesn't
have to be 3/8" long to start because it can be cut off
to size after modification. Be careful you don't
damage the threads if you must clamp on them. Tum
the 0.0. of the head of the screw down to .245".
Center drill with a #1 CD. Drill through with a
1/ 16" drill. Counterbore 1/8" deep with a 1/8" drill.
This completes the lathe operations.
"Indicate in" yaur vise
With the vise square with the milling machine table,
use an edge finder to align the center of the spindle
exactly over the edge of the fixed jaw of the vise.

Zero your handwheel or note the handwheel setting
and the direction the backlash has been set.
Machining the flat on the handle
Mount the handle in the mill vise in such a way one
side can be machined flat on the center section. A
spacer or parallel can be used to get it to the proper
height. Note that the spacer doesn't have to be
between the vise and the part. It can instead be
between the mill tabletop and the part. Mill to the
proper size in a series oflight, fast cuts. Ifthe handle
has been made to size the flat will finish .005" above
the small diameter of the handle. Leave a few
thousandths for polishing. Tum the part over, locate
on the surface you have just machined and machine
the opposite side to the proper thickness. Now lay
out the hole pattern for the square. This time it ' s for
real, so don't screw it up. We know the setting for
the fixed vise jaw, so it is a simple matter to "dial"
over to the center of the part and locate the center
on the other axis with calipers. Drill your holes and
tum the part 90 degrees and drill the alignment pin
hole. (Note: this could also be a 2-56 set screw if
you want to be able to take it apart some day. Your
choice.) Saw out the square hole and file to size.
(uHing the slot and drilling the side of the damp shaft
I aligned the clamp in the vise by placing a drill or
small shaft in the "Y" groove, "eyeballing" it square
and then milling the alignment slot. The drill gives
you a larger surface to look at while squaring the
clamp to the vise. I then drilled the weep hole for
soldering in the clamp with the same end mill.
Assembling the ports
We are now ready to put it together. Slide the retract
pin through the SHCS and solder or Loc-Tite™ the
pin to the clamp, making sure the SHCS can still
rotate independently from the clamp. Screw the
assembly into the handle, making sure it moves
freely. If it doesn't, correct the problem. The
alignment pin can then be put in place, and any
scratches that may have been added since polishing
can be removed. Remember that you can't back the
clamping screw past the alignment pin once the tap
handle has been assembled.
The tap handle is now ready to use or, better yet,
show to your peers. Someone asking how you put
the square hole through the shaft should be
considered the ultimate compliment. It means that
you have done the job so well it doesn't look
homemade.

324

SEGION 5- Project, and Resou,,,,

Proied 2- Making soft iaws for your mill vise
"",""fflfWl",

Making the basic blank jaws
The special soft jaws are quite easy
to make, and it's a good rainy day
project. Making several sets of the
basic jaws at the same time can save
a lot of time on future projects.
Square up the blocks and drill and
counterbore the movable jaw. (See
Section 3, Chapter 3 for more on
squaring up a block.) Drill and tap
the 10-32 hole in the fixed jaw and
you have your basic set.
Customizing the jaws for your
particular job
The next part is to customize the
blank jaws for a particular use .
Clamp the jaws up on a piece of
material that will give you the
proper gap you need on your final
product. Pete used an edge-finder to find the center
of the gap. If you know the dimension of the gap
you can easily get to center if you have the spindle
located over the fixed jaw by dialing over Y2 the
distance of the gap. If a closer tolerance is needed, a
dial indicator in the spindle could be used by rOlaling
the spindle and moving the appropriate axis until
the same reading is attained on the inside edge of
each jaw. Pete used a boring head to create the actual
clamping surface to hold the piston. NOl1llally the
jaws would be cut to a specific depth eliminating
the need for parallel bars, but Pete had a second use
planned for the jaws that required the additional
machined depth. Jaws used for production may have
a slight undercut on the bottom of the clamping
surface to allow for burrs on the corners of the part
itself or the debris that tends to build up in the inside
corners of clamping devices.

A set of cuslom aluminum "soft" jaws has been
bored to exact size /0 grip this aluminum piston as

it is machined. Time invested in making a fixture
like this is well spent, because it eventually saves
lime in clamping up oddly shaped paris. In addition,

the aluminum jaws also won '[ damage the part's
finish. In this case, a number of operations will be
performed on six pistons using these jaws.

Custom jaws grip hard-fa-hold parts
I had Pete Weiss make up a set of special jaws to
give you some idea of the type of tooling you might
make in the future to make a particular machining
job easier to do when yOll have multiple parts to
make. Another reason for building special workholding devices can be to attain an accuracy that
wouldn't have been possible otherwise. Work like
this doesn't have to be pretty, but it should be
functional. Before starting on the initial design think
about a second use for it. Many times by making
the device a little larger it could be used for several
different parts in the future. Building special tools
takes time, so you have to balance the time it takes
to build the tooling against the time it will save
making the part without it. However, the most
important consideration will always be the quality
of the work you will be able to produce with or
without it.

I iealize a novice to machining may believe that any
time spent working on a fixture that doesn't become
part of the final project is time wasted, but let me
assure you it isn't. At Sherline we have spent
thousands of dollars on special part-holding devices
to produce a single part that may have multiple
operations. The design effort that goes into these
special tools can be greater than the design of the
part itself.
325

4. An edge jinder is used to jind the center of the
gap to prepare for boring it to hold a round part.

1. After the blocks are squared up, they are drilled
and counterbored so they can be bolted to the vise.
1n this case, a stepped drill is being used that
drill and counterbore the hole in one operation.

wm

5. Once properly located and spaced, the jaws are
bored to hold the round piston. The jaws are
clamped on a piece ofstock ofthe proper dimension
to provide the desired gap. The jinal step on your
own jaws would be determined by the shape of the
IIIOIOIoPOHlUIS
part to be held.

2. The holes in thejixedjaw are tapped using a 1032 lap. A tapping guide is used to align the tap with
the hole to make sure it goes in squarely.

3. Thejinishedjaws attached to the vise ready to be
customizedfor your particular job.

31/5

SEGION 5- Projeds and Resources

Proiect 3- Laying out a 6-hole or 8-hole paffern
Why you should have listened in trigonometry dass
If our customers knew how easy it is to layout a
six-hole or eight-hole bolt circle I believe sales on
indexing devices would fall dramatically. I mention
using " trig" tables quite often, but it usually falls
on deaf ears. I am going to give it one more try, and
if you don't want to learn some real simple math it
is okay with me, because I'm always happy to sell
another rotary table.
Acouple of simple numbers make it easy to figure
Only three numbers from the trig tables are needed
to layout any six- or eight-hole bolt circle, and they
are .866, .707, and .5. If you can't deal with these
three numbers you may be getting into the wrong
hobby. 1 hesitate to call these numbers the sine and
cosine of the angle of the radius of the bolt circle
for fear of losing you before we even get started.
These tenns may bring back the horrible memories
of math class. Perhaps you didn't pay attention
because you never thought you'd have a need for
the knowledge, but now you wish you had listened
and learned. All is not lost, because I'm going to
give you a second chance. All you need to know is
these three simple numbers and you'll be able to
tell your friends that you "trigged" out the hole
pattern , and in this day and age they will
automatically be impressed.
If you want to do a six-hole pattern the numbers
you need are .866 (cosine) and .5 (sine). Multiply
these numbers by the radius of your bolt circle and
you will have the amount you must offset the X and
Y slides from the center of the bolt circle to have
the hole locate on the bolt-circle radius at 60 degrees.
Study the diagram and you'll see how simple it is.
You only have to know one number to do an eighthole pattern because both the X and Y offsets from
center are the same for 45 degrees in either direction
and that number is .707 (sine and cosine are the
same). It just doesn ' t get any simpler than this
because now you can layout any six- or eight-bolt
circle knowing only the bolt-circle radius. It can be
as small as the head of a pin or as large as the circular
net of roads leading into Washington DC and it will
still work.
In the example on the following page the hole circle
diameter is .313".

The last hole ofa 6-hole pattern is about [0 be drilled
IIsing only the handwheel sellings calculated by
trigonometry to locate the hole centers. This is a
more accurate method than trying 10 mark hole
centers and "eyeball" your drill into position. When
you can take advantage of the accuracy of your
handwheels and "trig oul" a hole pattern, you are
on your way to becoming a machinist.
The job is a lot easier if you can reset the handwheels
to zero, but the hardest part will be working with
the same number in two different directions.
Cranking in the numbers in both
positive and negative directions
The first rule for laying out hole patterns is to always
tum the hand wheels in the same direction you used
to locate the center when coming up to a new setting.

.156
Ilx .5)

FIGURE I-X- and Y-axis offsets for a 6-hole
pattern. (Drawings not 10 sca/e.)

FIGURE 2-X- and Y-axis offsets for all 8-hole
pattern. At 45° the sine and cosine are the same.

Remember this is to allow for backlash. You have
no doubt heard this term a number oftimes by now,
but I fi gured it wouldn't hurt to inject it into your

easier, but it still demands a lot of concentration from
even a skilled machini st. As with any complicated
machining operation, a mistake at any step can scrap
out the part, so the fastest way to a good part is to
work slowly and carefully.

brain one more time.
Here's so mething to keep in mind regarding
backlash: in one direction the numbers get larger in
a positive fashion when moving from zero (or the
current number on handwheels if they can't be reset
to zero) ; in the opposite direction the number must
be subtracted from .050" (lmm). Be sure you
understand thi s before you do any machining, and
calculate and write down the handwheel settings for
the entire hole layout before drilling any holes. It
takes more skill to keep track of these movements
than to calculate what the movements should be.
Once you've done it a few times the process gets

Another accessory can make it even easier

A digital readout (see page 98) can take most of the
misery out of dialing in these figures. Fi rst of all,
you can establi sh your zero reading with the push
of a button at your starting point. Then, it is just a
simple matter to dial in the distance (positi ve or
negative) you have calculated for the hole position.
After you get used to using a D.R.O., you will see
why most machine shops now have them on their
full-size shop equipment.

328

SECTION 5- Projects and Resources

Proiect 4-A little steam engine called "Millie"
Aproject from the pages of Mode/tee magazine
There are a number of magazines on the newsstands
that offer information for those wishing to make
projects oftheirown. Modeltec*, along with The Home
Shop Machinist, Ma chillist:~ Workshop, Live Steam
and, in Eng land , Model Engineer an d Model
Engineers Wo rkshop all cater to those wishing to build
working projects in metal. Publisher George Broad and
author Ed Warren were kind enough to let us reproduce
this 2-page article from the May, 1997 issue of Modeltee
for your enjoyment. The engine shown here was bui lt
on Sherline tools. On page 332 I have included a few
photos of the project as it was being completed. For
the spring, it was found that a balJ point pen spring which
was cut to length worked just fine.

"Millie" as a completed engine. Pete Weiss made
this sample from the plallS on the pages that follow.
He chose to add brass tubing extensions to make it
easier to attach an air or steam hose to mil it.
although they were 1/ot shown on the plal/s. Which
side the air is attached to determines ill which
direction the engine runs.

Here are the finished componelllS before assembly.
Only 8 parts and a spring are needed to make this
simple bllt fim steam engine.

*MOlieltec magazine ceased publication in 2004 but has been

purchased by another publisher. Watch for it to return soon.
329

A couple of fun evenings could be spent on

Making Milly Move
by Ed Warren
Photos by the Author and G. R. Broad
Drawings adapted for publication from CAD originals by the Author.

S IDE V IEW

F LYW H E EL EN D

The parts for Milly,laid out on Ed Warren's wor'Kbench.

Ed is facing Milly's cylinder after using the natural offset derived from chucking a four-sided piece
of stock in a three-jaw chuck 10 locate the cylinder bore for drilling and reaming.

CY LIN D E R E ND

Viewed Irom the side, everything but the spring
~ visible. The hole facing the camera is for the
steam (air) supply-or else the e~haust. dependi"~ on which dire<:tion you want Millylo move.

The 6' rule demonstrates the small size of this engine. That and ils simplicity would make ~ a great
project for introducing a young machinist to lhe hobby!

,..

-

.

-. . .

14 MODELTEC - May 199 7

330

Over the years I've seen teeny weeny
steam engines and always wanted to build
one. I should have done that a long time
ago, when my eyes were a lot younger, as
it would have been a lot easier. Now I
have to use glasses to see close up. Otherwise, everything is blurred.
Whether you have to squin t thro ugh
glasses or not when you' mark out the
lines, be very careful when you center
punch them so the holes are in the right
place. The smaller a steam engine is, the
more acc urate your work needs to be.
Starting with the Cylinde r Mount,
layout the holes and drill them. Next do
the Cylinde r, Here's a tip you can use.
Whenever a square piece of material is
put into a three-jaw chuck, the center of
the square will be offset. I use this to my
advantage in drilling and reaming the
bore in the square stock. The offset leaves
enough room between the back ofthe piston and the cylinder mount plate to put
the crank disk between them. That's how
Milly's cylinder was made.

t

~

•

·

~

•
~
~

~

•
§
i:i
'E
0

~

dfiU 1/8

518 dia.

1/4 dia.

FLYWHEEL
1/4 Steel, 1 Required

+--~""'-- inlobore
,- --;'-;:;,..., 1 1 16dfil

~

~
0

~

314 dia.

."

'E

~

When the hole pivot was drilled in
the cylinder fo r the 2-56 screw, I drilled
on in to the cylinder bore, but when I
tapped the hole, I did n't go all the way
through. That was so the incomplete
threads would jam the end of the screw
and keep it from vibrating out. Yes, it
really does work okay this way. If you
don't break into the cylinder with the drill,
then be sure to use a bottoming tap.
For making the Cran k Pi n and
Cranksh aft, use stainless steel and polish them up a bit.
The Flywheel will look a lot better
if the recesses are turned on both sides.
It's made out of stainless steel, also.
This engine is so teeny that when it
was assembled, Loctite was used w hold
the flywheel and crank disk on the crankshaft. instead of trying to find any setscrews small enough.
The first time I tried w ru n Milly, she
just refused to do anything like run-but
don't give up keep trying. Once she gets
broken in, she11 take off and mooove.

rrt

CRANKPIN
Steel, I Required

1l16

~

1Wol/16drill

~

~
l/8dril

2·56 (see telrt)

r
~

;;

1

~tffil~
" ,, '
'I'

~

1

,

,

11/16

P ISTON
Steel, 1 Required

,

CYLINDER
Brass, 1 Required
114

~

Drawings sare twice actual size.

'0

~iHIIIIJliliHlllI~

I

I '"

CYLIND ER MOUNT

1/16dia.

3116 Brass, 1 Required

BOLT
Brass, 1 Required

+ - - -- +
I
CRANKSHAFT
Stainless Steel, 1 Required

~~

I/Bdia.

CRANK DISK
1/8 Stainless Steel, 1 Required

33 1

11
4

~.

SPRING

,0lSor .018 Wire, I Required
May 1997 - MODEll'EC 15

(Left) Center
drilling the cylinder
moulIl.

(Right) Drilling the
J18" holes/or inpull
output tubes.

(Left) Drilling the
center of the crank
disk.
(Right) Reaming the
center J18" hole ill
the flywheel.

(Left) Parting off

the crank disk.

L.._ _ _ _ _- ' ' - - - '

(Right) The
completed crank
disk.
(Right) Indicating
in the surface ofthe
flywheel for milling.
The part is left in
the 3-jaw chuck so
it can be returned
to the lathe for
parting off without
recenlering.

""''''''PIll_

"Millie" under construction
as built by Pete Weiss

332

SECTION 5- Projects and Resau"es

Proied 5- The "LiHle Angel" hit In miss engine
The "Little Angel" is
all artractive gas
engille that rims all
Coieman/allrem/llel.
A

sIalldard

aI/to

ig lli1i oll coil call be

II sed with a 6-volr

battery to fire the
sparkp fllg, or smaller

model coils call also
be IIsed.

Building the "li"l. Angel"

(ammon questions about the engine

Bob Shores built the model shown above and offers
plans for sale so you can build it too. II is a fairly

Here are some answers to questions people often ask
about the "Little Angel":

advanced proj ec t fo r a ma chini st with so me

• The cylinder bore is 1/2". The stroke is also 112".

experie nce and skill . The plans cost $25 which barely
covers Bob 's cost to blueprint and ship them, so he is
doing this pretty much for the fun of it. As of December
1997, about 291 "Little Angels" had been built. Axel

• The fly wheels are 2.5" in diameter.

• It runs on a mixture of 90% lantern fuel and 10%
WD40 during break-in , 5% WD40 after break-in.

Nielson in Oregon built seven of them and gave one to

• A regulator controls engine speed. After break-in
it is normally set to run at about 300 to 400 RPM.

each of hi s grandchildren. Aillhe parts can be built on
miniature machine tools. The plans include fi ve expertly
drawn, blueprinted sheets with parts shown full size.
Also included is a I O-page typed instruction booklet
plus a sheet to help you with timing settings.

• The engine will run continuously for 23 days on
one gallon of fuel.
• The compression ratio should be 7: I or less.

To order plans contact:

The "Hercules"...a larger project

Bob Shores
108 Carmelina Street

Also available are plans for an engine called "Hercules"
which is a 2-cylinder in-line design that is perfectly sized
for miniature machine tools. It is a scaled down version
of Bob's "Silver Angel", which is a1soavailable. Despite
its larger size, a number of them have been built using
Sherline tools. Contact Bob Shores for more infonnation
on prices for plans and casting kits.

Ruskin, FL 33570
e-mail : bobshores@msn.com
Brochures on the engine are free upon request. As of
2004, plans are $25 which includes postage . ($30 for
shipment outside the USA.) See www.bobshores.com
for the most current price and ordering infonnation .

333

Profile of 0 world-doss mochinisl by Croig libuse

Wilhelm Huxhold•••Contest Winner and Metalworking Craftsman
ilhelm Huxhold grew up in Germany, and the
first time he saw a lathe in school he knew he
had to build a model of one. (See page v.) He showed
an aptitude for working in metal ,
so he followed in his father's

realigning meteorological instruments which look
advantage of his machining skills. Seven years later he
foresaw government cutbacks and began a business of
his own in the same field. Soon the
government was his biggest customer.

W

footsteps

and

entered

an

Seven years ago he retired, keeping

apprenticeship program in 1945 as
the bestofhis shopequipmentlOQutfit
a machine fitter which is similar to
his roomy 15' x 36' home shop.
Retirement ofters new
a tool and die maker in the USA.
challenges
After a 3-year apprenticeship, he
went to work in a glass factory
"Retired" is a curious word to
where his machining skills were
describe a man who still spends six
used to keep production equipment
to ten hours a day, seven days a
running. Here he learned to make
week in his shop. The difference is,
parts not only accurately but
now he is doing only what he wants.
quickly. A broken machine had to
This includes building the smali and
intricate models he never had time for
be brought back on- line fast or
production fell behind.
Wilhelm "Bilt HUlhold
before. His years of work, however,
In 1953 he immigrated to Canada with hopes of
provided him with a pattern for how to take a project
from start to finish. Though he doesn't commit much to
finding work, but, speaking little English, he ended
paper, he plans each step of a project in his head until
up taking a "temporary" job in construction which
lasted for the next thirteen years. Finally, he secured
he knows every cut he will make. He trusts nothing to
"trial and error", as years of machining parts for a living
a job with the Canadian government developing and
taught him that could get expensive.
Now it is not money but time that
concerns him most. Like many
hobbyists, he has enough projects on
his list to last severa1lifetimes, so he
tries to make his shop time as
productive as possible. He now
challenges himself by working on
smaller and more detailed projects.

Honored for

0

lifetime of

excellence in craftsmanship
Mr. Huxhold was selected as the Joe
Martin Foundation's Metal-working
Craftsman of the Year in 1999. Each
piece of his work has the
unmistakable signature of a true
master. More about contests and
awards follows.

Bill Huxhold's 5-inch long compound Corliss engine is made from
stainless steel, Meehanite and aluminum. With proper care, machinists
a thousand years from flOW will still be admiring this project.
334

It should be Iloted that of the fi rst eight winners
of the Joe Martin Foundation award onl y two
use Sherline tools Oil a regular basi~. Though
Joe is th e owncr of Shcrlinc Products. thc
foundation is not conllei:ted in any way with
the company. and those ~c l ectcd arc chose n
bascd solc ly Oil th e quality of their work
regardlcss of the cquipment used to produce it

SECTION 5- Proiects ond Resources

Chapter 2-Contests and awards for machinists
The Sherline Machinists' Challenge
Each year since 1992, Sherline has sponsored a
contest at the North American Model Engineering
Society (N.A.M.E.S.) show in Michigan. Originally
called the "Sherline Machinist's Shootout" it was
conceived as a way to accomplish a couple of goals
that I feel need to be accompli shed. First, I would
like to encourage more projects to be built at the
small end of the sca le as it offers a number of
advantages to the builder. Secondly, I wou ld like to
see those who take the time to make a really nice
project rewarded with both money and recognition.
I feel that sports heroes and movie stars get far too
much recognition in comparison to the people who
really make this country work: the thinkers and
builders. This is my own small attempt at throwing
some li ght on those who have worked hard to
develop a valuable skill. Rather than spending time
in front ofa TV, these people are actually making
things, and that is where the future of this country
lies.
Encouraging people to "think smoli n
The rules to the contest encourage entries of all
types, from steam and gas engines to jewelry to
models of shop equipment. All it has to be is a
device that has a number of precise parts that work
together and exhibit precise fits and demonstrate
good skills with hand and machine tools. What
makes this contest different is th at we put a
maximum size limit on the projects which requires
that they be small. In recent years, the definition
has been 64 cubic inches of volume wi th a
maximum single dimension of 5 inches. This does
not include the display base or protective case. In
the case of a ship's cannon, for example, it would
not include the diorama of a partial deck that would
serve to display the cannon.
What I hope to accomplish by this is to show that
projects of this .size offer a number of advantages.
Number one, the materials involved are minimal,
which keeps the cost down. Also, the machines
required are smaller, which means that a machinist
could set up a complete miniature machine shop for
less than the cost of a major accessory for a fullsize machine. Secondly, I feel that projects increase
in interest as they get smaller. A model of a radial

This 6-cylinder "hula-hula" engine was entered in
the 1997 contest by John Kirkbride of Bellingham,
Washington. It features an interesting motion and
beautifully polished surfaces, but much ofthe appeal
of this model comes from its small size. At less than
4" in diameter it could be displayed just about
anywhere. One of the purposes of the contest is to
get more builders to appreciate thefact that building
small projects offers a number of advantages.

airplane eng ine that is 16 inches in diameter is
certainly a marvel to look at, although you would
probably have to go out to the builder' s garage or
workshop to view it, as it would be too big and
heavy to be displayed in the house. That same
engine bu il t 4 inches in diameter or smaller
approaches the appeal of fine jewelry. It may have
the same number of pieces and each may be made
to the same quality of finish, but its small size adds
another dimension to its appeal. People who might
335

not even be interested in airplane engines will be
interested in the model simply because of its small
size and intricate detail. The builder can display it
on a desk, coffee table or shelf in the house and
easily carry it around with him to show if off to
others. It will become a treasured heirloom to be
passed down to other members of the family rather
than a large object under a dust cover in the garage.
Many of the projects that have attracted a lot of
attention at the contest have been small enough to
be carried in a pocket.
Though Sherline Products puts up the prize money,
there is no requirement that the projects be built
using Sherline tools. Size and content only detennine
the project's eligibility for entry.

for them. Scotty Hewitt won the contest three years
in a row with entries that had a toy-like appeal that
spanned all age and experience levels. Though his
entries may not have been the best machined,
virtually everyone from machinist to novice found
something in them that appealed to them enough to
give them one of their five votes. In the seven years
of contests to date I don't think anyone has ever
won less than about $30, and several have won
many hundreds of dollars. Since it costs nothing to
enter, everyone has come away happy. The total prize
purse is as much as $2500 if there are twenty-five
or more entries.

An interesting way to judge a (on test
The first year of the contest we had a panel of judges
who decided on the winners. This was far from ideal
for many reasons. The following year we developed
a formula which has worked great ever since. We
let the spectators at the show do the judging. That
accomplishes two goals: I) It removes any
possibility that the contest organizers have slanted
voting toward any particular entry, and 2) It involves
the spectators at the show in looking more closely
at the entries, as they are now the judges.
Next to each entry we place a cup. Spectators at the
show are given five tokens each and asked to select
their five favorite projects and vote for each by
placing their tokens in the cups next to those projects.
They have to spread them out over five different
projects and cannot place all five in one cup. Each
vote is worth one dollar to the builder of the project
when the tokens are counted up on Sunday
afternoon.

Judges at the contest are now the show s exhibitors
and spectators. They vote on what appeals to them,
so the winning projects are the ones that span a wide
range oj interests. Since it is unlikely that everyone
who views your own projects will be an engineer or
machinist, it's something to keep in mind when
deciding what to build.

Projects that appeal to many are the key to success
The interesting thing about having the spectators do
the judging is that the results end up rewarding a
different type of project than if it were just judged
by machinists and engineers. When the wives,
friends and kids of the show participants vote too,
you get a much better idea of what the average person
finds interesting and appealing. On the whole, the
best projects are recognized by everyone as being
superior and they receive everyone's first vote, but
the other four votes go to a wide range of projects.
One year Dick Saunders entered a pair of machined
earrings. I don ' t think they got too many votes from
the engineers in the crowd, but all the women voted

Making project plans available 10 others
One of the other goals that I had hoped to accomplish
with the contest does not seem to be working out
too well. I have specified in the entry form that
anyone who comes up with plans for their projects
is welcome to sell or distribute them at the contest
or through our web site. One of the things people
need when they first become interested in a hobby
is a project to build to hone their skills. Most people
don't buy a machine and then look around for
something to make with it. When you go to the
hardware store to buy a drill, it's not because you
want a drill, it's because you want a hole. People
get into the hobby because a particular project

attracts their interest, and they want to learn the skills
and own the tools of miniature machining so that
they can make that cannon or miniature steam engine
to put on their display shelf.
The manufacturers of kits and the people who sell
plans offer a decent selection, but many of them are
too large to build using tabletop machine tools. I
am hoping that as miniature machine tools become
more widely distributed the demand for small project
plans will increase and more will become available.
The experienced machinist is capable of scaling
down existing plans or designing his own projects,
but a beginner needs entry level projects with well
written and illustrated instructions.

I'm not giving up
It's still not too late. I hope my appeal here will
reach some of you who have built or will build nice
projects in the future. Take a little extra time when
you are done to compile your "as built" drawings
into a set of plans so that others can enjoy the
satisfaction you felt in completing your project.
Some sketches, photos or written descriptions of key
setups would also be helpful to a beginner. I will be
glad to publicize any plans or kits which are made
available for projects that are suitable for miniature
machine tools on Sherline's World Wide Web site
at no charge. I realize there is little money to be
made in selling plans, but I would hope some of
you will take on the challenge just for the satisfaction
of bringing more people into the hobby and helping
offer them a wider selection of projects to be built
so that they can enjoy their first miniature modeling
expenence.

someone who has just been around a hobby for a
long time. The award is based strictly on quality of
work The person's age, level of experience,
personality or number of friends should have nothing
to do with selection.
Jerry lOcHer, 1997's winner
For 1997, r selected Jerry Kieffer to be the first
recipient of the "Metalworking Craftsman of the
Year" award. You can see many examples of his
work throughout this book, and he has produced an
amazing quantity of some ofthe best miniature work
I have ever seen. More amazingly, he has done it in
a fairly short amount of time and with no fonnal
training as a machinist. He only started working on
miniature machining projects about 8 years ago. He
has a regular daytime job and works on projects in
the evenings and on weekends in his shop. His total
unwillingness to accept any result other than
perfection makes it even more amazing that he has
completed so many projects and mastered so man y

Afoundation is funded to aword craftsmanship
In 1997, I decided to put aside a sum of money to
start The Joe Martin Foundation for Outstanding
Craftsmanship. Each year, the interest generated by
that fund will pay for a $1000 award to the best
craftsman of the year in the field of miniature
metalworking.
Many of the builders of really outstanding projects
are not ones who would necessarily enter them in a
contest, but generally each member of any group of
craftsmen knows and can agree on who is "the best"
in their particular field. For the first year, I selected
the winner myself. In the years to come, I will ask
an individual or group to guide the selection of a
person from their field of interest. I have specified
that the award is not a "popularity contest" for

Jerry Kieffer displayed some ofhis work at the 1997
N.A.M.£.S. show in Michigan. Jerry's models arc

ollly totally scale down to the smallest bolt, they
also run beautifully.

1I0t

3.37

disciplines. He really is a "perfectionist", meaning
he keeps working on a problem until he gets it right,
even if the results will never be seen by anyone but
himself. A broken tap could be drilled out and the
hole sleeved if a cover will be bolted over it and no
one would know. Jerry wou ld start over on the part
feeling that someday, someone may remove the
cover and find that he had made a mi stake. His
desire for perfection and devotion to scale is the most
uncompromising I have ever seen.

in these fields. I feel the it takes no less talent to
produce beautiful work in thi s field, and it would be
nice if this foundation could help to raise the level
of awareness of the public to include some of the
masters in modeling and metalworking.
I would like to find a way to bring these masterpieces
to the public's attention in the form of a mu seum.
Many builders produce an impressive amount of
work in their lifetime. They may have no family or
anyone who would appreciate it to leave it to. I would
like to be able to find a way to help them either sell
their work at a good price or receive a substantial
tax break by donating it for di splay.

Alan Ingersoll is the winnerfor 1998
For 1998's winner I asked Robert Washburn and the
people at Strictly I.e. magazine to find the person
they felt was the outstanding builder of small internal
combustion engines. They submitted the name of
Alan Ingersoll of San Mateo, California. After
see ing photos of hi s Curtiss P6-E biplane with
operational scale V-12 engine I agreed with their
selection. Hi s award was presented at the 1998
N .A.M.E.S. show in Wyandotte, Michigan. (See
page 340 for a photo.)

Also being considered is video docume ntation of
some of these masters, because I fe el there are
others like me who will find their storie s and
techniques interesting. To me it is not only the
projects that are interesting . The reasons why a
builder chose a particular project and the way he
went about building it can also tell you a lot. I'm
sure we could learn a lot more in a half hour
interview with Leonardo DeVinci than we could
from an analysis of the Mona Lisa by some art critic.
Probably any who find this book interesting would
also enjoy hearing the thoughts and seeing the shops
of the people who built the projects in the photos.
Right now these and other projects are still in the
thinking and planning stage and are some of the
foundation's long-term goals. I wanted to mention
them here in case you would like to offer help or
suggestions on how to get them accomplished.

Goals for the future
One of the goals I hope to accomplish with the
foundation is to bring well-deserved recognition to
the skill of those who make small, precise projects
in metaL 1 am interested in finding ways to help
establish a value for projects such as you see in this
book that adequately reflect the time and skill that
went into making them. You see auctions and sales
for art, watches and jewelry that fetch tremendous
prices for work done by the recognized "masters"

_,01, AWl I_CIHOll

Alan In gersoll's 1:6 scale Curtiss P6-E biplane is shown
uncovered so the construction detail can be appreciated. It
will be displayed jn the Hiller Aviation Museum in San Carlos,
California. The project took over 12 years to complete.
33X

A detail of parts of the Curtiss V-12 engine
under construction. Th e entire engine is
only 9 inches long. All parts were machined
from solid bar stock. No castings were used.

SECTION 5- Proiects and Resources

Chapter 3- Exploded Views and Part Numbers
The following pages contain exploded view parts
drawings ofthe lathe, mill and rotary table. These will
help you understand how the machines are assembled
should you need to make repairs. They will also help
you identify part numbers should you need to order
replacement parts.

play. With what you have learned from this book you
will gain a new appreciation ofhow difficult it is to make
so many parts work together while trying both to maintain
accuracy and to keep costs down. I think you will gain
a new appreciation of not only how well miniature
machine tools work, but you will also come to see in a
new light the design successes and failures in many
products you use daily, from the blender in your kitchen
to the automobile in your garage.

When you look at the drawings, compare the machines
to the most complicated project you have attempted.
Consider all the fits and tolerances that must be held for
a machine of this type to provide accurate movement
while minimizing unwanted movements like flex and

B" mou,nli,npo 1(10100.>1 and lathe cUlling tool on the rotary table. a part holted
10 machine a radiused surface. Several concave radii are
to a faceplate is spun on the axis
shown on Ihis one pari. The modular nature ofthese miniature machine tools allow.\· you to creale setups 10
accomplish virtually any machiningjob you can conceive 0/

339

SHERLINE LATHE EXPLODED VIEW AND PART NUMBER LISTING
NOTE: Where different. Inch part number is given first, followed by Melric part number.
I

I

"'"

40510

43170
'M~

406J0 (UK)
4Q640 (Eur.)

.~.

3·1('

SHERLINE VERTICAL MILLING MACHINES
EXPLODED VIEW AND PART NUMBER LISTING
NOTE: Where different. Inch part number is given first, followed by Metric part number.

"00

40620 (US)
40630 (UK)
40640 (furn.)

90060
43200 (lobel)

41130

/'
45010/45160

40080/4104(1

-;-

40530

5005 "

-"'L ~ 4lIS20

'-r-b ! ,
'r.v ! V

/

" II 40280il
j

40520

~34Z21l

~_/ ~1I0

, ~,~!
)
34260/34270

~
. ""
/ '/"

~1~/~170 ~,~/~

/r~
t'.

40560 / .
40550
~1l2O/S4120

40570

~"'lI~'''' 40520 , )'
34110 /
34220

.".

EXPLODED VIEW, SHERLINE MODEL 2000 MILL COLUMN
40115 (Inch)
4117S(Melric)

EXPLODED VIEW AND
PARTS LISTING

~

~::::: ~
T¥---t-

S62301 - -------{f;!!l

S6200 ------(~~

40340

~ 'm.

"

,\~=:':'~
62~"~ S6330 (Inch)

\
" ' _ J/

56220- - -- " ' "

56550

56 110

-----t:~~
-

56030 (Inch)
56040 (Metlic)

/

,

---j

',

'(

'~

' ,

...
'

50211

/: '

"'<':) ,
\J

/1
,'~

___

./
, ",

56331
(Melfic)
y - - - - S64S0

~- 35160

,'
--

,

lSI,,"

56 ..'

""
/'

"

!

"6" I '

1'1

" ~
:,: .~' , '

,I

-c ~ "~I i
"
"-,

" ' - - - - 56210

' - -- - 5 6 4 70

"'~'"

NOTE
F port numbers of tobie, (olumn bed
or
and headstock/m
olor/speed (onlrol
portions of mill, see Ihe Mill Exploded
View on page 329.

,

!

562"----i

7"'''------, ;';60;;1;0 (Inch)

(Mellic)

342

f-----.J

PART NUMBERS AND DESCRIPTIONS, SHERLINE LATHES AND MILLS
KEY T MATERIALS: A Aluminum, B B C Composile, D = D Casl, P= Plastic, U= U
O
=
= rass, =
C ie
rethone, S=Sleel
PART NO. DESCRlnlON
,,~

m7

"'"

119"
n6JO
3IJ21O

"'"
nloo
31080
~OOO

"""
~Ioo
~200
~210

~'"
~'"
~,~
~150

~'60

~'"
~300

"""
344"
~SOO

35160
35110

4110"

"""
"""
411070

"""'
"""
~Ioo

411111
411112
~m

~160

40170
40174
411175
40176
~m
~In

..,.,
"'"
"'"
~I~

,~~

""'
'~60

40170

....
....
.".,

40000

"'"
,...
40370
40390

.....
.~~

'OSOI

"'''
"'~
<OS"
"""
"'''
""'
"'""
40\70

MATtRlAL

1/4" HSS R haod wiling roo!
ight
HNdSlOIk Spinel BIOIk (Deluxe Mill)
ROiker T Post Bod,
ool
ROOcef locI POll (ente!"
Spring lin I·Axis SoddJe Nul)
TOWle 5wikb Retoining Ring
ToggleSwiIth
11J..32 x3/8" Flo! Point Set Sue...
11.32 Hex Nut
Oversile Handwheel (lndI)
Thrun 8eoring Walher Set
Oveni:e Hor.dllheel (Merrit)
2" Zero Adiullable HrKlllhl. Alb,. (lfKh)
2" lIandwheel Body
Hondwheell.olking Nut
YAxis/Csoss/ide Collor (lfKh)
YAxil/Csolliide Collor (Metri!)
6-3217/8" Pan Head xrell
X, ZAxil and l.eudsaell Coller (lfI(h)
X ZAxisond Leadsuew Collar (Merrit)
,
2" Zero Arliuslable Hndwhl. Albr., (Mer.)
2·1{2" Zero ArljU1l. Hndllhl. Asby. (Iorh)
2-ln" Hondwheel Body
2·Jn" ZHOAdjUl1. HrMlwhi. Alb,., (Mel.)
Graduoled Clamping R
ing
Ma¥eOble (Iamping Ring
IS" Lallie Bed
Motor Brodtet
Orne B
eh
1·5/8" Handwheel, YAxl!ICronJide (IndI)
Foreplole
1·5/8" Handwheel. XAlil/leodsaew (IndI)
Dri"tlllOOjl
Heads1lXk Casing
T
aiJnodc Coling (Gib !lyle)
Tailsrod: Gib
Lolhe Bed
Prelood NUl
Saddle Nur (IndI)
Saddle Nil! Body Only (lfKh)
Column LlXking lever (Inch)
Column Saddle TroRI ulenlioo
Saddle Nul Anembly w/ Boll, Z {lnrh)
·Axil
1/8" Boll
Tool 1'011
Leadsaell (lfI(h)
Feed xrew (lfKh)
Heodsrork Spindle
~ork Pitol Pin, Lorhe
Tool POSl T Nur
ee
Head Key
TaikrlXk Spir.dle (Inch)
Thrust CoIlor
Leodsaew Thrust
Bearing Washer
10-32 I 5/8" Sock!! Head Cop Saell
10·32 11" Sodret Head (ap Xre.
Leadsaew Support
#1 Morse (enler
#0 Morse (enler
PlI.I\I Bullon
Headsl00: 8eoring
SeHTopping Saell
10·2417(8" Socket Head Cop xrew
10·32 1 In" Bunon Head Sodret xrew
10·321l/8" Socklr H (op xrew
ead
10·32 13/16" (up Poinl Ser Screw
5-40 13/8" Sadet Head Cop xrew
5{16·18 X3/4" Cone Point Set xrew
5/31" Hel Key
3/16" Hel K
ey
I/B" Hel Key
3/32" Hel Ke,

,
M'
•
,
,
,

,
,

•

&11

•
IJS

PART NO. DESCRIPTION

'ffiW

....
....
"'~
40000
406~

40670
406~

W60

"""

• "'''
, "'"
• 409"
• "'"
,
• .,,"
• "'"
' 'BO
41040

IJS
WI

•
WI

•
,

IX
IX
U

•
•
•
•
•
,

IX
IX

,

•
•
•
,
•
,
•
,
,
,

41110
41130
41170
41174
41175
4lln

"200

"'"
moo
"'"
41270

43110
m~

mw

43140
~I~
~I~

43170
43180
m~

43200
~230
~3~

"'''
"'"
44010

,
,
,
,
,
,
, ,,'"
,
,
,
,
,
#I~

#200

44210

#'"
#230

#BBO
45010

41••,
,~"

45160

45110

P
&11

,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,

45180
45190

41200

100"
SOOSO
"'~
"'W
50140
"'60

50170

",W

"'~

"'''

MATERIAL

Spindle Bar
,,.- LD. Womer
10·32 J 1{4" Flat Poinl Se1 xlew
Power Cord, USA
POwel Cord, U~
Power Cord, Europe
3/16' 1.0. WOW!

10·]2 11/2' SoIket Head (op xrew
10·32 13/4" SoIket Head (op S<rew

PART NO. DESCRIPTION

, ""'
, ,.,.,
, "'~

,
,
,
,
,
,
•
,
•
•
,
•
ro
•
•
•
,
,
,
•
•

10-321 5/8" Thumb~rew
Gibl.olk
T
ailnlXk I.oIking Saell Grammer
P
TailllOik Spindle I.oIking xrew
Slide Saew Inser! (lfKh)
10-32 I 3/8" flar Head Socket x rew
Saddle
(
Gib,lo111e Ifonlide, mill X- and Y-Oles
(
Gib, lathelllddle, mill Z.olil
1·5/8" Handwheel, XAxis/Lead~rew (M
errie) A
'
1-5/8" Handllheel, YAxil/Csosslide (Merrie)
~32 Hel Nil!
Toilllork Casing {Old SIJ\e wilhour gib}
DC S~ Conrrol Knob and Set Saell
SoddIeNII!
Saddle Nul Bod, Only (Metric)
(olumn I.oIking lever (Melrk)
Saddle Nur Assembly wi Boll. I·Axii (Mmie) B
Leod!!rew (Merril)
Feed xrew (Metrie)
Toillloo: Spindle (Melri1)
Slide xrew lmen {Merrie}
DC Mo1Of SlandoH
P
DC S~ Conrrol Cole
DC Speed (onrrol Hioge Piole
P
DC S~ (unlrol CoYer Mounring Plare
P
DC Speed Cootrol Tab, Smoll
P
DC Speed (on1rol T LorI/\!
ab,
P
Beh Guard, Duler
P
1>-32 I 1-3{8" Pon Head Sae"
Beh Guord,lnnef
P
#211/4" flor H Sheer Metal xrell
ead
DC Speed (onrrol Label
F
oil
Stepped Main Spindle Pull~
Stepped Moror Pulle,
IX "".
DC Speed Conlra! EleerrooKs
24" Lathe lluse
IX
24" Larhe Bed
24"le-odsuew (Imh)
SliM xrell (Inrh)
Slide Saew (Merrie)
24" Lead!!rew (Metric)
uosllide
leod!!rew, ZAxil (lndI)
Column Bed
Saddle, I A.o:is
I.oIk, Tefioo
P
leadsrrell, I Axil (Melrie)
Column Saddle Lark
P
3/16" Ball8eoring
#10 TfIII BWalher
l.eudSirew ThMI, Bored
16" Mill Ball!
(alumn Bose
Backlosh llXk
Bodlalh Nur, XAxis (Inch)
Bodlosh Nur, l Axis (Inch)
L
eadurew, YAxil (Imh)
L
eamuell, XAxis (h
uh)
Mill T
obie
XAliI Lock
Nur, YAxis (lfKh)
B-32II/4" Pon head xrell

•
•

,
,
,
,
,

•
,
,

•
,

,
,
,
•
•
,
•
,
,
,
•
,
•
,

343

1/4·20 x 1·314" Socket Head Cap Smw
Headst!Xk Pil'Ol Pin, Mill

Thrul1 Collar, Mill

"''' "'"'
51130
S114l1
51160

51170

Ba(klosh Nut, XAJis (Metric)
Batllll$h Nut, YAxis (Metric)
leodsluw, YAlii (Merril)
L
eadsuew, XAlii (Metfi()

moo

Nut, YAl;is (Metric)

"'"
"'~
"'60

12" Mililluse, [)elule Engraved (Inch)
11" Mill Bose, D
elule Engrami (Melri!)
L
eadICrell, YAxis, Delule Mill (lfKh)
Lead~rew, YAxis, Delule Mill (Mellie)
Mill Table, Delule Engraved (lfI(h)
Mill T Deluxe Engroved (Merric)
able,
#2000 Mill Bose (IndI)
#2000 Mililluse (Melril)
hlensioo Boh
#2000Arm Hold-down Bolr
#2000 Y-Axil Leammll (Metri!)
#2000 Y Leadluew (Inrh)
·Axil
#2000 Aim Hold·down Washer
3/8·16 I 2" Sfiouidered Boh
#2000 Swing Arm Side
FloogeNur
1/4·21)1 1·1{2" SHCS
#2000 Swing Arm Side (Engrami,lorh)
#2000 Swing Aim Side (Engraved, Metrir)
Column Arljulrmenl Btork
#2000 Arm Spocer BllXk
#2000 Aim Mount
Ifldel Tab
8·3211/4' Button Head xrew
3/3r 1 1{2" Dollel Pin
#2000 ColumnTop
#2000 Column Bose
Column Spacer
DC Speed Conlrol5K Polenliomeler
3}8·32 Hel Nur

smo

"'~
"'W

"'''
"'"
56110
~I~

~I"
~160

"200

56210

"'"

~130
~,~

S63lO

10331

""'
"""
"'"
"'''
"'"
"'''
~'"
, "'"

,

MATERIAL

~n.

90060

,
,
,
•
•
,
,
,
•
•
•
,
,
•
•
•
•
,
,
,
,
•
,
•
,
,
•
•
•
•
,
,
,
,
•
•
•

,

Joe with the staff of Sherfine Products. The success of a company is more than just a one-man effort. Karl
Rohlin is Shop Foreman and has been with the company for twenty-two years. Charla Papp is Sherline s
General Manager. She started out working as a secretary and has been with the company for over twelllYtwo years. Craig Libuse is Marketing Director and has been doing Sher/ine s artwork, instructions and
catalogs for over twenty-five years, originally as an independent graphic artist and flOW as an employee.
The average length of employment for the people in the shop is over seven years, all of which speaks well
of the company s working conditions.

Alan Ingersoll (right) receives an award
plaque and a check as the 1998 Joe
Martin Foundation "Metalworking
Craftsman of th e Year". It is being
presented by Mr. Robert Washburn,
pubfisherofStrictly I.e. magazine. Under
Mr. Washburn s left hand is the Curtiss
V-12 engine shown 011 page 334. On the
table also are some of the winning
elltries in the magazine's colltes! for
internal combustion engines.
344

SEGION S- Projects ond Resources

Chapter 4 -

A Simple RPM Gage

Know ing the exact speed your machine is running

is not all that critical. It is how the cut is progressing

that will determine final adjustments to the speed
and feed. Normally, starting at 114, 1/3, 112 speed,

etc .. , on the speed control knob wi ll get you close
e nough. Howeve r, some people find it interesting
to know what speed their machine is actua ll y
runnin g, a nd thi s s imple gage ca n help you
determ ine that.

How the gage works
The gage was po sted o n o ne of th e Inte rn e t
newsgro ups and ha s bee n passed around long
e nou gh that who actuall y ca me up with it first is
uncl ear. It is similar to gages th at we re used to
adjust the speed of record players to exactl y 45 or
33- 1/3 RPM. Unde r light from a fluoresce nt bulb
that run s on 60 Hz. current , the gage will give you
an accurate reading when you are running at one of
th e speeds on th e gage. The " fl ashin g" of the
fluorescen t bulb at 60 cycles per second will cause
one of the bands to appear to stop moving at the
RPM indicated by that band. The gage wi ll not work
very we ll with an incandescent light bulb because
the fil ament glows and doesn't dim much during
the cycling of the current. The speeds indicated on
the gage from the outer ring in are: 100, 300, 400,
480,600,720, 800, 900, 1200, 1800 and 2400 RPM.
The circular gage can be copied on a copy machine
and the copy cut out. It is then glued to the pulley of
your machine. Rubber cement or spray adhesive are
the best for thi s purpose.

Away to make the gage easier to read
Because the gage spins, the numbers can' t be read
o nce the machin e is tu rned on. If you wish, the
indicator at the right can also be copied, cut out,
pasted to thin shirtback cardboard, trimmed to size
and mounted to th e speed control hou sing as a
reference. Fold an offset into the indicator at the
li nes shown so that it runs just above the surface of
the pulley. The center fits over the spindle shaft and
the numbers line up with the rings of the gage to
help you tell which ring is which when the motor is
turning. The easiest way to mount it to the speed
control housing is with double sided Scotch® tape.
A layer of clear packing tape over eac h will make
them easier to keep clean.

RPM GAGE

Th e RPM gage and if/dictor moun ted to a lathe.
Though sized/or a Sherlille pulley. the gage may be
resized/or use in other applicatiolls as well.

FIXED RING INDICATOR
For more information o n determining whut the
proper speed fo r your particular cut should be, see
pages 102 and 103.
345

Inventor Harold (lisby sees
his product come full circle

This artist's
conception of the Clisby
Lathe shows many similarities to the

current Sherline lathe. Compare the base, bed,
tailslock, handwheels. toolpost, chuck and motor/pulley position to
those of the Model 4000 Sheriine lathe.

Harold (Ii.by'. place in Sherline hi.tory
Though the Sherline product name was taken from

has gone relatively unheralded for the past thirty
years. Perhaps the introduction of his new lathe will
bring some well deserved notice to the man who
invented what has now become the world's most
popular small machine tool, the Sherline lathe.

the first manufacturer in Australia, Ron Sher, the
designer of the original lathe and accessory line was
an Australian engineer named Harold Clisby. In the

late 1960's Mr. Clisby noted the flexibility of the
then popular Unimat lathe and decided that extruded

shapes could be used to make an inexpensive yet
rigid small lathe. He went to electrical engineer Ron
Sher for help in motor application for the lathe and
eventually ended up turning the production of the
machines over to Ron's company, Ronald Sher Pty.
Ltd., when he went on to pursue other projects. In
the early 1970's, Joe Martin became the U.S.
distributor for the product and eventually the sole
worldwide manufacturer of the line, but as you can
see from the drawing above, the basic concept of
the machine has remained virtually unchanged from
Mr. Clisby's original design.

Avisit to Sherline and an all new (Iisby lathe
In May, 1998, Mr. Cl isby and his son Orville visited
Sherline's plant in Vista, California. He stopped by
not only to see how the product he fathered was
doing thirty years later, but to introduce us to his
late st project. After several successfu l business
ventures in Australia, many years later Mr. Clisby is
again in the lathe business. His new Clisby Lathe is
a 2.5" model powered by a 12-volt DC motor. The
overall length of the desktop-sized tool is less than
12". Information on the tiny lathe can be found on
the Internet at www.clisby.com.au.Mr.Clisby·s
contribution to the miniature machine tool industry

Harold Clisby (right) is seen in the cover photo from
Overseas Trading magazine in March, J97 J
presenting the Clisby lathe to potential buyers.
NOTE: Mr. Harold Clisby and his son. Orville, visited
Sherline sfacility after this book was ill it sfinal fon", so this
article s inclusion here may seem somewhat ofan afterthOlI8ht.
He is such a gentleman and his contribution to the Sherlille
tool line so great, I felt YOII might want to learn a little more
abOllt him. He was kind enougll to provide the drawillgs alld
photos from his archives. -Joe Martill

346

Index
12L 14 (sec "Ieadloy steer-)
3-jaw chuck- 39. 115. 116. 118. 119. 121.
123. 126. 132. 137. 138. 145. 149.
172. 173. 186.188.189.23 1. 232.
280. 282. 293
4-jaw chuck-107. 115. 116. 117. 118.
121. 126. 137. 138. 186. 187. 188.
189.212.224.280
• Independent law chucks-30
• Self-centering 4-jaw-118. 138

A
Abrasives-59. 60
Adjustable "zero" handwheel-33. 36. 97,
213
Adjustable tailstock tools- 141. 146,252.

267
• Adjustable live center- 139. 143,
252. 267
• Adjustable right ungle lailstock210

' Adjustable tailstock chuck
holder- 139. 143
• Adj ustable tailstock custom tool
holder- 139
Alignment key- 127, 251
Angle block (See "Right angle block")
Annealing--46
Anodiidng--47. 48
Arbor-121. 124. 125. 142
Atlas lathe- 191
AutoCad®--259. 261. 289. 290

B
Backlash- 36. 97. 90. 196. 198.214.254.
267
• Adjusting- 257
Band saw- 39. 249
Barrel plating (Sec "Plating")
Bead blasting--61
Bed (lathe)- 149. 155.200
• Improving fi l when worn- 257
Belt sunder-250
Bench grinder-60. 63. 77. 249
Bevel gear (See "Gears")
Black oxidc-46
Boring -66.172.197.198
• Grinding a 1001 for- 156
• Quick eh:mge holder for-156
• Tool- 72. 82.130.131. 239
Boring head- 82. 198
Brazing- 53
Breslaucr. Bob-II. 119. 147. 190.218.
266,315.3 16.317

Bresley. Mih--20
Bridgeport mill-34. 38.193.194.282.

290
Brierton. Tom- 19
Britnell. George-I I
Brown & Sharpe Mfg. Co.- 86
Brumberger. Jesse- 14
Busch. Glenn- 16

c
CAD- i
CAO-CAM-M. 259
Calibrutions. (inch vs. metric)-31
Calipers- 88. 89
• Oial-93. 94
• Oigital-93
• Rezerowing a dial caliper-93
• Vemier- 93
Carbide cutters--48. 74
• Brazed tip-72. 131
• Inserted tip- 131
Carlisle Corporation-281
Case hurdening--45
Cuslings
• Oie--49. 51
• Holding for milling-183
• Investment--49
• Lost wax--49
• Model-51, 183. 308
• Sand- 50
CO-RaM- 30
Chamfering tool- 59
Chatter- 75. 77. 80, 84, 103. 104. 105,
127,132. 136. 137, 138, 173, 196,
268
Chips--40, 43, 67, 68, 69. 72. 73. 74, 75.
99.100,102. 107, 125, 131. 158
Chip guard- 139
Chuck (See also "3-jaw chuck", "4-jaw
chuck" and "Tailslock chuck")115. 119, 128, 130,252. 288
• Jaws- I 16. 117, 119
• Lubrication- I07
• Mounting- 187, 212
• Scroll-I 16. 117
• T-slot adapter-IS7
Chrome plating (See "Plating")
Clamps- 185. 189, 190,239
Clark, Jim- l66
Clisby, Harold-272. 338
CNC- i. 36, 37. 54,04,6<1.70, 101. 105.
109, 134, 136. 142.266.282,283,
287,291. 292. 293. 307. 308

347

Collets-70. 139. 196. 288
• Adapter- l44
• Milling-82, 202
• WW- 119, 120
Collet pot chuck- I 19, 120. 172
Colonnu, Ron- 14
Comparitor (See "Optical comparitor")
Compound slide- I 19, 127, 128, 129, 132
Computer- I04
Conrad. Greg- 223
Conversion factors-350
Coolant- 99. 100, 104
Coordinate Measuring Muehine-86
Core- SO
Counterbores--68
Countersinks--68
Crosslide- 121, 129, 132. 150, 154. 163,
165, 192, 285
Crosslide accessory plate- In. 178
Culpepper. Robert- 14
Cutler. Churles- 317
Cutoff saw- 39, 195,249,295
Cutoff tool - 39, 75, 76
• Quick change- I 56
• Rear mounting block- 76. 139,
146
CUller palh radius- 212. 2 13
CUlling speed--42, 73, 74, 75. 10 1, 102,
103. 104. 105. 135,201,293
Cutling tools- 129. 131. 155
• Grinding your own- 72, 77, 129
• High speed steel- 72, 74, 77,102
• Inserted tip-73
- Lathe- 72
-Left hand- 72, 130
- Right hand- 72, 79
-Side tool- DO

o
Dead eenler- I 19. 120. 15 1
Deburring-249. 250
Deflection- 7, 63, 83,103,155,293
Depth of cUI- 10 I, 104, 129, 153,200,
201

DeVynek, Richard- 14
Diametral piteh- 220, 221, 223. 224
Dies- IS7. 158,268
• Split or Butlon-157
Digital calipers (See "Calipers")
Digital readout (for mill)-98
Dinanju, ChriS- IS

Dividing head or dividing plate (Set:
"Inde"ing Plate')
Dog (See "Drive dog")
Draft angle-SO
Drills/Drilling-67. 69, 197. 198
• Angled holes-35. 237
• Center-65. 122. 124. 125. 141.
14].144.149. lS I. 198.2 17
• For dri llling stainless steel-67
• Jobber-66
• Screw machinc-66
• Speed-44. 103
• Spotting-65
• Stcpped--68
• Usi ng large bits----67
Drill chuck-34. 70. 12]. 124. 14 1. 142.
143, 202. 252
Drill press-65. 71. 194

Gage pin-95
Gal1-44
Gaucher. Roland-20
Gears-2 19
• Bevel....:::::225. 232
• Clock-2. 219
• Culters-22 I. 229
• EpicycloidiHypocycloid-220
• Helical-225. 226. 233
• Underculling- 223
• Worm-225
Gear hobber- 158. 228. 233
Gib-1 9 1. 196
• Adjusting/replacement-256
Grabner. Jim- IS
Graver- 132. 17 1. 172. 17]. 174
Grinding (See "Culli ng tools")

• Vise-1M
Drive dog-I 19. 121. 126
Dykem T ).I-87. 199.322

H

E
Edel broc k Company-50
Edge findcr-%
EDM- 51.64
Elicit. M.H.-60. 61
End mills-4]. 81. 84. 94. IOJ. 188. 196.
198.200.201.202. 215. 2]9
• Ball end-82
• Deflection of-63. 81. 94
End mill holders-B2. 107
Engi ne lathe-128
Ewell. Ed ward- ] 18
E"trusion-5 1

F
Fabe rgc. egg-281
Faceplate- I 19. 121 . 125. 126. 130
Feed (rate}-43. 44. 66. 68. 7]. 75. 101.
103.104. 105.108. 129. 137
Files. hand-57. 58. 59
• Usingli nstalli ng handles-58
"Flinch factor"-]O
Fly euuerlFly cutting-81. IW. 1%. 198.
205. 206. 221. 239
'I nsened ti pearbide-71
Follower rest-139. 152. 153. 154. 155
Forging-51 . 52
Form tapping (See 'Thread~reading")
Form tool-80. 131
FOIi. Mike-26
Foundry-51
Fran7~ Dennis-IO

G
Gage block-95. 96

Hac ksaw-39
Hammons. Carl-iii. 15.2 19.263.276
277.279.290.29 1. 293. 297. 300.
301. ]02. ]05
Handwheel (See also "Adjustable 'zero'
handwheel")-] I. 34. 38. 101. 107.
121. 127. 13 1. 1]8. 191. 194.2]6.
254.267
• Removing/re placing-255
Hard chrome (Sec "Plating")
Hardinge lathe-2 17
Ha.
~brouc k. Raymond- 18
Hayes. Chuck-281
Headstock-34. 35.1 19, 126. 128. 14\.
194. 212,237.256
• Aligning with tailstock- 25I .

267
Headstock spacer block- 33. ]4. 139
Heat trcming-42. 45
• Heat treated tools-72. 73
Height gage-88. 92. 93
• Miniature-240
Heill. Ross-306
Hermann. Charles-256
Hewiu. ScOity- 12. 17.23.24.25.260.
306.3]6
Hickman. C.D.-221
Hiscano. Augie- 2 1. 179 180. 181. 182
Hiscano. Carol- 180
Hook (on cutting tool)-79
Horizontal milling conversion-232. 235.
237. 267. 286
Huxhold. Wilhelm-v. 22. 2 17. 260. 334

I
Indexing attachment-2 15. 216. 2 17. 229.
231. 239
Indexing plate-2 I 5. 216. 217. 228

348

"Indicating in"-206. 2 14. 2]9. 254. 324.
]32
Indicator (dialtest)-92. 97. 196. 199.252
Industrial Press-27
Ingersoll. Alan-3]8. 344
Injection molding-4]. 44
Inspection depanme nt- 9. 91
Ivester. Chip-122

J
Jewelers lathe- I44. 171. 172.295
"Jo block"-96
Joe Manin Foundation-337. 344
Jordan. Barry-v. 246

K
Kasenite™-45
Keyway-146
Kieffer. Jerry- 12. 13.47.52.62. 110.
111 . 112. 113.114. 134.260.3]7
Kirkbride. John-334
Knockout bar- I 19
Knurli ng tool- I68. 169. 170
Knurls
• Straight. diamond-167. 170
• Bump-167
Kombrink. Larry-152
Koston. Bemie-293
Kraft. Phil-245. 279. 280
Kra ft Systems. Inc.-27]. 279. 280. 281.

297
Kubin. Joseph-235
Kutz. Russell-16

L
Lamp. Larry-55
Lathc-29. 32. 51. 58. 63. 65. 711. 107.
108.122. 1]0.177. 252. 267. 271.

29 1
• Aligning headstock and
tailstock- 25 I
• Exploded view-336
• Full sizc- 129
• Initialtcst CUlling on-136
• Model 1000-3 1. 272
• Mode l 4()()(y4 JOO-3 I. 36. 280
• Model4000Al4 100A-33. 36
• Model 440014410-3 1. 36
• Model 44OOA/44 10A-33
• Model 450014510 -]6
Lathe dog (See "Drive dog")
Lead (lhread}-I60. 164. 197
Leadloy steel-39. 42
Leadscrew-3 1. 36. 37. 97. 107. 159. 160.
16].266.267
• Removing- 255
Leiser. &1-267

Libuse. Craig-H. 4, 24. 112, 113. 180.
242.259.286.299,316,344
Libuse, Frank- 17
Live center- I 19. 123, 139. 15 1,252,281
Long. Richard- 18
Lubrication--65,67. 107. 108, 122. 141,
153
Luhrs. George-IO. 156,271
Lutz. Oan-24I , 242, 243

M
Mach;tlU),l Halldbook-3, 27, 28, 39. 67.

102, 167.210,220.223.227,229,
230.270
Machinis!'s Challenge contest-331
Major diameter (thread)-I60. 162
ManSon lat he-8
Mani n. Oon-2 1, 222
Manin, Joe-i, ii. iii, 4. 6, 247, 273, 274.
290.299.307.308
Mathes. 00n- 277
Mason. George-13
Mattson. Phil- 56, 106,208.239
Maxwell, Tom-53
Micro Avionics-276. 277, 278
Micrometer-88, 89, 90, 95, 118, 165
• Depth-95
·lnside-94
Mill (See venical milling machine)
Milling- 198
• Conventional vs. cJimb-83.
94. 197
• Horizontal-203
Milling vise-183, 184. 185, 188. 195.
197,205.224.239.319
• Making soft jaws for-325, 326
Minor diameter (thread)-I60, 162
Modelmaker- IO. 87, 1{)6, 239
Morse taper - 122. 123. 14 1. 158,202
Multicon Corporatio'l.-279
Myford lathe - 177, 191

N
N.A.M.E.S show-335, 337
NASA-276.281
Neal. James E. -234
Nelson, leny-289

o
Optical comparitor- 95, 165

p
Papp, Charla- 344
Parallel-205, 206. 207. 325
Parry, Howard-50
Paning off tool (see cutoff tool)
Pattem-49. 50
Pauemmaker-I,50

Perreira. Timmy-22
Piecznski. Joseph- 192
Pitch (thread)- I60, 161
Pitch diameter
• Of gear- 221.7f1
• Of thread-I60. 166
Plastic-32, 43
Plating-9,46, 166
• Barrel-48
• Chrome-47
• Hard Chrome--48
Polishing stones-59
Pope. Frederick-298
Poner. Darrell- 192
Powder coo.ting-9
Power feed-139
Powered metal (See "Sintered meta]"')
Preload nut- 256
Pressure angle (gear:s)-22I , 222
"Pulling.on tool"- 7, 87, 211

Q
Quick-change tool post- 156

R
Radius cutting attachmen t- 133. 134
Rake ( of cutter)
• Positive vs. negative-73
• Negative rake tool holder-74
Reamers-68.69, 102, 125,202
Rifflers (or riffles)-57. 58
Right angle attachment-2 10
Right angle plate- 186. 205, 206, 237
Riser blocks (See also "Cuttoff tool rear
mounting block")- 145. 147. 150.

21'
• Headstock- 145. 147
• Tailstock- 145. 146. 147
• Steady rest- I46, 147
Riser tool post (See "Tool post")
Rocker tool post- 124, 147
Rockwell hardness (testi ng}-45. 46
Rohlin. Karl-302. 340
Rotary column attachment-35, 237. 238
Rotary tablc- 189. 203. 204. 209. 21 1.
2 12.2 14.2 15,2 18.227.228.232.
239, 253, 262, 289
• CNC indexer-234
• Exploded view- 263. 343
Rubino. Salvatore-19
Runout-97. 116.2 12.288

S
Saddlc- 149. 152. 153. 155. 160. 19 1,
237
Saddle nut-254
• Replacing-255

349

Sand blasting--61
Sandpaper-60. 153. 183
Saunders. Dick-239. 282. 336
Scherer. Henry-320
Scherf. Dennis- II. 240
Schroeder. Tim-5. 16. 186.248
Schulz. Ku n-240
Screw-a·matic-279
Sears Roebuck & Co.-1 92. 278. 279. 282.
283. 284. 285. 286. 291
Stier. Ron-270. 279. 281. 282
Sherline Products Inc.
• Australian roots-272. 278
• As examples-4
Sherwood. Chuck-269. 270. 27 1
Shores. Bob-71. 3]3
Shrin k ratc-50
Schultz. Kun- 12
Side tool (See "Cutting tools")
Sine bar-96. 97
Sintered metal-52
Smith. Steven-306
Smith. William R.-132. 172. 175.220.271
Soldering-52. 56
• Silver-53
Speed (See "Cutting speed")
Spindle-70. %.107.1 16, 123. 159. 164.
191. 194. 195. 212.217.235.236
• Removing end play-256
Spur driver-139
Starrett. LS. Company-88. 92. 93, 94. 95.
96.199
Steady rest-50. []9. 149. 150, 15 1. 155.

281
Step collet (see "Collet pot chuck")
Stepper motor-]7
Stress-proof steel-39. 42
Surface platc-91. 92
• Miniature-244

T
T.I.R. (See '"Runout")
Table (mill)-191. 192.200
Taguchi. Benny- 277
Tailstock-107. 12\. 1]7. 143. 15\. 193.

211
• Aligning- 142
• Drilling with-25I . 267
Tailstock chuck-32. ]]. lIS. 138. 142, 143
Taper cuuing- 126. 127. 128
Tapping guide-326
Tapping head- 71
Taps--69. 71. 103. 157.268
• Bottoming--69
• Cheap--69
• Checking tapped holes-I 66

• Hand-70
• Handle-70, 319
• Making your own- 32 I
• Plug---69
• Spiral fluted---69
• Spiral poinl---69
• Wrench- 70, 285
Taylor, Graham- 187
Teachwonh, Edwin-19
Thomos Register- 279
Thompson. Chris-II
Threadsffhreading- 2, 158. 172
• Cutting for practice-162
• Fonn lapping-158
• Internal- l64
Threadsffhreading (Continued)
• Left hand- 162
• Rolling- 158. 161
• Single pointing- I 58. 163
Thread chasing- 162
Thread cutting attachment-139, 158, 159,
163. 164,233.281. 284
Threading tool
• Inside- l64
• Standard 60°-159,161, 164
Tilting angle table-187, 188.204.210,
211.227,239
T-nul- 76, 126. 168, 186, 187,211
Tolerances- 142, 25 1, 279
• Buildup-153
• Establishing-264
Tommy bars-liS, 121. 189,2 12,288
Tool chatter (See "Chatter")
Tool height gage- 124
Tool posl-76, 121. 124, 130, 131
• Riser 1001 post-1 45. 147.214
Tool WrapTI.L...45
Tooling plate- I77, 186, 195,239
Toolmaker- i, 5, 9.133,192,254,292
T-slot- 133. 152, 168. 185, 187. 19 1, 195,
210
Tumbler--60, 6 1
Two-position tool post-139

u
Unimat lathe-3, 149, 192,276.277.281.
282.284

v
Vernier scale-88, 89
• Reading- 90
Venical milling column
• Multi-direclion- 176. 177
• Standard-30. 138, 176, 177.
178. 286

Venical milling machine-29. 10]' 108.
130,197,20]' 203. 204. 211, 224,
267,289,291
• Adjusting worn column- 257
• Aligning-252
• Exploded view-34 I
• Model 200012010-35, 38. 193.
194,204
• Model 5000/5 100-33, 35, 36,

Wheel dresser- 77
White. John D.- 26
White. Paul- 241, 244. 245
Whittle, Eric- 14, 251
Williams, Granger and Larry- 292
Winters, John-IS
Wood- 32, 4 1,43,136,183
Wood tool rest-42, 139
Work hardening-lOS
Worldwide Web---279, 287
Wonn gear- 225

19'
• Model 540015410-34. 35, 36,
2J2
Venical milling table- 139, 177
Vise-44

X
XY base-30, 36,178,236
XYZ base-30. 36

W
Wanen. Ed-325, 326
Washburn. Roben- 334, 340
Weiss. Pete-16. 120,214.224.325,326.
329.330
Welding

y
Young, Edward J.-4

• Arc-53
• MIG-54
• Spot-54
• TIG- 54, 55

Conversion factors
TO CONVERT FROM

TO

MULTIPLY BY

LENGTH

Inthes
Meiers
Imhes
Centimeters
Inches
Millimeters
Feet
Meiers

Metel1
Inches
Centimeters
Inches
M
illimeters
Inches
Meters
Feet

.015.
39.3701
1.5.
.3937
15.•0
.03937
.3048
3.1808

Cubic Inches
Cubic Centimeters

VOLUME
Cubic Centimeters
Cubic Inches

16.3871
.06101

WEIGH7

Troy Ounces
Grams
Avoir. Ounces
Grams
Groins
Grams
Troy Ounces
Avoir. Ounces

Grams
Troy Ountes
Grams
Ayoir. Ounces
Grams
Groins
Ayoir. Ounces
Troy Oumes

31.1035
.03115
18.3.95
.03517
.0648
15.431
1.0971
.911.6

Foot Pounds
Newlon-meters
Inch Pounds

fORCE
Hewlon-meters
F Pounds
oot
Foot Pounds

1.35581
./3756
.0833

350

